# Source: WHO Diabetes.pdf

## Page 1

GLOBAL REPORT  ON DIABETES

## Page 2

WHO Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data Global report on diabetes. 1. Diabetes Mellitus – epidemiology. 2. Diabetes Mellitus – prevention and control. 3. Diabetes, Gestational. 4. Chronic  Disease. 5. Public Health. I. World Health Organization. ISBN 978 92 4 156525 7 (NLM classification: WK 810) © World Health Organization 2016 All rights reserved. Publications of the World Health Organization are available on the WHO website (http://www.who.int)  or can be purchased from WHO Press, World Health Organization, 20 Avenue Appia, 1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland  (tel.: +41 22 791 3264; fax: +41 22 791 4857; email: bookorders@who.int). Requests for permission to reproduce or translate WHO publications – whether for sale or for non-commercial  distribution – should be addressed to WHO Press through the WHO website (http://www.who.int/about/licensing/ copyright_form/index.html). The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do not imply the expression of  any opinion whatsoever on the part of the World Health Organization concerning the legal status of any country,  territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. Dotted and  dashed lines on maps represent approximate border lines for which there may not yet be full agreement. The mention of specific companies or of certain manufacturers’ products does not imply that they are endorsed or  recommended by the World Health Organization in preference to others of a similar nature that are not mentioned.  Errors and omissions excepted, the names of proprietary products are distinguished by initial capital letters. All reasonable precautions have been taken by the World Health Organization to verify the information contained in  this publication. However, the published material is being distributed without warranty of any kind, either expressed  or implied. The responsibility for the interpretation and use of the material lies with the reader. In no event shall the  World Health Organization be liable for damages arising from its use. Design and layout: MEO Design & Communication, meomeo.ch Printed in France.

## Page 3

3 CONTENTS Preface Acknowledgements Executive summary Background Part 1:	 Global burden of diabetes 1.1	 Mortality from high blood glucose, including diabetes 1.2	 Prevalence of diabetes and associated risk factors 1.3	 Burden and trends in the complications of diabetes 1.4	 Summary Part 2:	Preventing diabetes 2.1	 Population-based prevention 2.2	 Preventing diabetes in people at high risk 2.3	 Summary Part 3:	Managing diabetes 3.1	 Diagnosis and early detection 3.2	 Management of diabetes – core components 3.3	 Integrated management of diabetes and other chronic health conditions 3.4	 Access to essential medicines and basic technologies 3.5	 Summary Part 4.	National capacity for prevention and control of diabetes: a snapshot 4.1	 National policies and plans for diabetes 4.2	 National guidelines and protocols 4.3	 Availability of essential medicines and technologies 4.4	 Surveillance and monitoring 4.5	 Summary Conclusions and recommendations Annexes Annex A. Current WHO recommendations for the diagnostic criteria for diabetes  and intermediate hyperglycaemia Annex B. Methods for estimating diabetes prevalence, overweight and obesity  prevalence, mortality attributable to high blood glucose, and price of insulin 4 5 6 10 20 21 25 30 31 34 35 40 42 46 47 49 54 58 61 66 68 69 71 74 74 76 82 83 84

## Page 4

4 preface PREFACE Diabetes is on the rise. No longer a disease of predominantly rich  nations, the prevalence of diabetes is steadily increasing everywhere,  most markedly in the world’s middle-income countries. Unfortunately, in many settings the lack of effective policies to create  supportive environments for healthy lifestyles and the lack of access to  quality health care means that the prevention and treatment of diabetes,  particularly for people of modest means, are not being pursued. When diabetes is uncontrolled, it has dire consequences for health  and well-being. In addition, diabetes and its complications impact harshly on the finances  of individuals and their families, and the economies of nations. People  with diabetes who depend on life-saving insulin pay the ultimate price  when access to affordable insulin is lacking. In an effort to address this growing health challenge, since early this decade world leaders have committed  to reducing the burden of diabetes as one of four priority noncommunicable diseases (NCDs). As part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, Member States have set an ambitious target to  reduce premature mortality from NCDs – including diabetes – by one third; achieve universal health coverage;  and provide access to affordable essential medicines – all by 2030. We have an enormous task at hand, which is why I welcome this first WHO Global report on diabetes. The  report makes an important contribution to our understanding of diabetes and its consequences. It advances our understanding of trends in diabetes prevalence, of the contribution of high blood glucose  (including diabetes) to premature mortality, and of what action governments are taking to prevent and  control diabetes. From the analysis it is clear we need stronger responses not only from different sectors of government, but  also from civil society and people with diabetes themselves, and also producers of food and manufacturers  of medicines and medical technologies. The report reminds us that effectively addressing diabetes does not just happen: it is the result of collective  consensus and public investment in interventions that are affordable, cost-effective and based on the best  available science. Please join me in ensuring that the findings of this report are used and its recommendations implemented so  that we may indeed halt the rise in diabetes. Dr Margaret Chan Director-General WHO

## Page 5

5 Acknowledgements This report benefited from the dedication, support and expertise of a number of WHO staff and  external collaborators. Staff from WHO headquarters: Gojka Roglic coordinated and produced the report in collaboration with  an editorial team comprising Cherian Varghese, Leanne Riley and Alison Harvey. Etienne Krug and Ala  Alwan provided strategic direction. Statistical analysis was provided by Melanie Cowan and Stefan Savin.  Timothy Armstrong, Nicholas Banatvala, Douglas Bettcher, Francesco Branca, Edouard Tursan d’Espaignet,  Suzanne Hill, Ivo Kocur, Cécile Macé, Silvio Mariotti, Colin Mathers, Leendert Nederveen, Chizuru Nishida,  Laura Sminkey, Gretchen Stevens, Meindert Van Hilten, Temo Waqanivalu and Stephen Whiting provided  technical input. The country profiles (available online) were prepared by Melanie Cowan with assistance  from Nisreen Abdel Latif, Maggie Awadalla, Sebastian Brown, Alison Commar, Karna Dhiravani, Jessica  Sing Sum Ho, Kacem Iaych, Andre Ilbawi, Xin Ya Lim, Leanne Riley, Slim Slama and Juana Willumsen.  Elena Altieri provided communications support. Joel Tarel, Hélène Dufays and Melissa Foxman Burns provided  administrative support. Staff from WHO regional offices: Alberto Barcelo, Padmini Angela De Silva, Gampo Dorji, Jill Farrington,  Gauden Galea, Anselm Hennis, Warrick Junsuk Kim, Hai-Rim Shin, Steven Shongwe, Slim Slama, and  Thaksaphon Thamarangasi reviewed the draft report and provided technical input. WHO wishes to thank the following external contributors and reviewers whose expertise made this  report possible: Stephen Colagiuri, Pamela Donggo, Edward Gregg, Viswanathan Mohan, Nigel Unwin, Rhys Williams and  John Yudkin for providing guidance on content. James Bentham, Goodarz Danaei, Mariachiara Di Cesare, Majid Ezzati, Kaveh Hajifathalian, Vasilis Kontis,  Yuan Lu and Bin Zhou for data analyses and estimates. David Beran, Stephen Colagiuri, Edward Gregg, Viswanathan Mohan, Ambady Ramachandran,  Jeffrey Stephens, David Stuckler, John Yudkin, Nicholas Wareham, Rhys Williams and Ping Zhang for writing  sections of the report. Peter Bennett, Pascal Bovet, David Cavan, Michael Engelgau, Ayesha Motala, Simon O’Neill, Eugene Sobngwi,  Nikhil Tandon and Jaakko Tuomilehto for peer review. Angela Burton for technical editing. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

## Page 6

6 Executive summary EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Diabetes is a serious, chronic disease that occurs either when the pancreas does not produce enough insulin  (a hormone that regulates blood sugar, or glucose), or when the body cannot effectively use the insulin it  produces. Diabetes is an important public health problem, one of four priority noncommunicable diseases  (NCDs) targeted for action by world leaders. Both the number of cases and the prevalence of diabetes have  been steadily increasing over the past few decades. GLOBAL BURDEN Globally, an estimated 422 million adults were living with diabetes in 2014, compared to 108 million in 1980.  The global prevalence (age-standardized) of diabetes has nearly doubled since 1980, rising from 4.7% to  8.5% in the adult population. This reflects an increase in associated risk factors such as being overweight or  obese. Over the past decade, diabetes prevalence has risen faster in low- and middle-income countries than  in high-income countries. Diabetes caused 1.5 million deaths in 2012. Higher-than-optimal blood glucose caused an additional  2.2 million deaths, by increasing the risks of cardiovascular and other diseases. Forty-three percent of  these 3.7 million deaths occur before the age of 70 years. The percentage of deaths attributable to high  blood glucose or diabetes that occurs prior to age 70 is higher in low- and middle-income countries than in  high-income  countries. Because sophisticated laboratory tests are usually required to distinguish between type 1 diabetes (which  requires insulin injections for survival) and type 2 diabetes (where the body cannot properly use the insulin it  produces), separate global estimates of diabetes prevalence for type 1 and type 2 do not exist. The majority  of people with diabetes are affected by type 2 diabetes. This used to occur nearly entirely among adults, but  now occurs in children too. COMPLICATIONS Diabetes of all types can lead to complications in many parts of the body and can increase the overall risk  of dying prematurely. Possible complications include heart attack, stroke, kidney failure, leg amputation,  vision loss and nerve damage. In pregnancy, poorly controlled diabetes increases the risk of fetal death and  other complications. ECONOMIC IMPACT Diabetes and its complications bring about substantial economic loss to people with diabetes and their  families, and to health systems and national economies through direct medical costs and loss of work and  wages. While the major cost drivers are hospital and outpatient care, a contributing factor is the rise in cost  for analogue insulins 1 which are increasingly prescribed despite little evidence that they provide significant  advantages over cheaper human insulins. 1. These are insulins derived from human insulin by modifying its structure to change the pharmacokinetic profile.

## Page 7

7 Executive summary PREVENTING DIABETES Type 1 diabetes cannot be prevented with current knowledge. Effective approaches are available to prevent  type 2 diabetes and to prevent the complications and premature death that can result from all types of  diabetes. These include policies and practices across whole populations and within specific settings (school,  home, workplace) that contribute to good health for everyone, regardless of whether they have diabetes, such  as exercising regularly, eating healthily, avoiding smoking, and controlling blood pressure and lipids. Taking a life-course perspective is essential for preventing type 2 diabetes, as it is for many health conditions.  Early in life, when eating and physical activity habits are formed and when the long-term regulation of energy  balance may be programmed, there is a critical window for intervention to mitigate the risk of obesity and  type 2 diabetes later in life. No single policy or intervention can ensure this happens. It calls for a whole-of-government and whole-ofsociety approach, in which all sectors systematically consider the health impact of policies in trade, agriculture,  finance, transport, education and urban planning – recognizing that health is enhanced or obstructed as a  result of policies in these and other areas. MANAGING DIABETES The starting point for living well with diabetes is an early diagnosis – the longer a person lives with undiagnosed  and untreated diabetes, the worse their health outcomes are likely to be. Easy access to basic diagnostics,  such as blood glucose testing, should therefore be available in primary health-care settings. Established  systems for referral and back-referral are needed, as patients will need periodic specialist assessment or  treatment for complications. For those who are diagnosed with diabetes, a series of cost-effective interventions can improve their  outcomes, regardless of what type of diabetes they may have. These interventions include blood glucose  control, through a combination of diet, physical activity and, if necessary, medication; control of blood  pressure and lipids to reduce cardiovascular risk and other complications; and regular screening for damage  to the eyes, kidneys and feet, to facilitate early treatment. Diabetes management can be strengthened  through the use of standards and protocols. Efforts to improve capacity for diagnosis and treatment of diabetes should occur in the context of integrated  noncommunicable disease (NCD) management to yield better outcomes. At a minimum, diabetes and  cardiovascular disease management can be combined. Integrated management of diabetes and tuberculosis  and/or HIV/AIDS can be considered where there is high prevalence of these diseases. NATIONAL CAPACITY FOR PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF DIABETES National capacity to prevent and control diabetes as assessed in the 2015 NCD Country Capacity Survey varies  widely by region and country-income level. Most countries report having national diabetes policies, as well  as national policies to reduce key risk factors and national guidelines or protocols to improve management  of diabetes. In some regions and among lower-income countries, however, these policies and guidelines lack  funding and implementation. In general, primary health-care practitioners in low-income countries do not have access to the basic  technologies needed to help people with diabetes properly manage their disease. Only one in three low- and

## Page 8

8 Executive summary middle-income countries report that the most basic technologies for diabetes diagnosis and management are  generally available in primary health-care facilities. Many countries have conducted national population-based surveys of the prevalence of physical inactivity  and overweight and obesity in the past 5 years, but less than half have included blood glucose measurement  in these surveys. ACCESS TO INSULIN AND OTHER ESSENTIAL MEDICINES The lack of access to affordable insulin remains a key impediment to successful treatment and results in  needless complications and premature deaths. Insulin and oral hypoglycaemic agents are reported as  generally available in only a minority of low-income countries. Moreover, essential medicines critical to gaining  control of diabetes, such as agents to lower blood pressure and lipid levels, are frequently unavailable in low-  and middle-income countries. Policy and programme interventions are needed to improve equitable access. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS This first WHO Global report on diabetes underscores the enormous scale of the diabetes problem, and also  the potential to reverse current trends. The political basis for concerted action to address diabetes is there,  woven into the Sustainable Development Goals, the United Nations Political Declaration on NCDs, and the  WHO NCD Global Action Plan. Where built upon, these foundations will catalyse action by all. Countries can take a series of actions, in line with the objectives of the WHO NCD Global Action Plan 2013–2020,  to reduce the impact of diabetes: yy Establish national mechanisms such as high-level multisectoral commissions to ensure political commitment,  resource allocation, effective leadership and advocacy for an integrated NCD response, with specific attention  to diabetes. yy Build the capacity of ministries of health to exercise a strategic leadership role, engaging stakeholders across  sectors and society. Set national targets and indicators to foster accountability. Ensure that national policies  and plans addressing diabetes are fully costed and then funded and implemented. yy Prioritize actions to prevent people becoming overweight and obese, beginning before birth and in early  childhood. Implement policies and programmes to promote breastfeeding and the consumption of healthy  foods and to discourage the consumption of unhealthy foods, such as sugary sodas. Create supportive built  and social environments for physical activity. A combination of fiscal policies, legislation, changes to the  environment and raising awareness of health risks works best for promoting healthier diets and physical  activity at the necessary scale. yy Strengthen the health system response to NCDs, including diabetes, particularly at primary-care level.  Implement guidelines and protocols to improve diagnosis and management of diabetes in primary health  care. Establish policies and programmes to ensure equitable access to essential technologies for diagnosis  and management. Make essential medicines such as human insulin available and affordable to all who  need them. yy Address key gaps in the diabetes knowledge base. Outcome evaluations of innovative programmes intended  to change behaviour are a particular need.

## Page 9

9 Executive summary yy Strengthen national capacity to collect, analyse and use representative data on the burden and trends  of diabetes and its key risk factors. Develop, maintain and strengthen a diabetes registry if feasible and  sustainable. There are no simple solutions for addressing diabetes but coordinated, multicomponent intervention can make  a significant difference. Everyone can play a role in reducing the impact of all forms of diabetes. Governments,  health-care providers, people with diabetes, civil society, food producers and manufacturers and suppliers of  medicines and technology are all stakeholders. Collectively, they can make a significant contribution to halt  the rise in diabetes and improve the lives of those living with the disease.

## Page 10

BACKGROUND

## Page 11

11 Background KEY MESSAGES Diabetes is a chronic, progressive disease characterized by elevated levels of  blood glucose. Diabetes of all types can lead to complications in many parts of the body and can  increase the overall risk of dying prematurely. Countries have committed to halt the rise in diabetes, to reduce diabetes-related  premature mortality and to improve access to essential diabetes medicines and  basic technologies. Effective tools are available to prevent type 2 diabetes and to improve  management to reduce the complications and premature death that can result  from all types of diabetes. Diabetes is a serious, chronic  disease that occurs either when  the pancreas does not produce  enough insulin (a hormone that  regulates blood glucose), or when  the body cannot effectively use  the insulin it produces (1). Raised  blood glucose, a common effect of  uncontrolled diabetes, may, over  time, lead to serious damage to the  heart, blood vessels, eyes, kidneys  and nerves. More than 400 million  people live with diabetes. Type 1 diabetes (previously known  as insulin-dependent, juvenile  or childhood-onset diabetes) is  characterized by deficient insulin  production in the body. People  with type 1 diabetes require daily  administration of insulin to regulate  the amount of glucose in their  blood. If they do not have access  to insulin, they cannot survive.  The cause of type 1 diabetes is  not known and it is currently not  preventable. Symptoms include  excessive urination and thirst,  constant hunger, weight loss,  vision changes and fatigue. Type 2 diabetes (formerly called  non-insulin-dependent or adultonset diabetes) results from the  body’s ineffective use of insulin.  Type 2 diabetes accounts for the  vast majority of people with diabetes  around the world (1). Symptoms  may be similar to those of type 1  diabetes, but are often less marked  or absent. As a result, the disease  may go undiagnosed for several  years, until complications have  already arisen. For many years type 2  diabetes was seen only in adults but  it has begun to occur in children. Impaired glucose tolerance (IGT)  and impaired fasting glycaemia  (IFG) are intermediate conditions  in the transition between normal  blood glucose levels and diabetes  (especially type 2), though the  transition is not inevitable. People  with IGT or IFG are at increased risk  of heart attacks and strokes.

## Page 12

12 Background Gestational diabetes (GDM) is a  temporary condition that occurs  in pregnancy and carries longterm risk of type 2 diabetes (2).  The condition is present when  blood glucose values are above  normal but still below those  diagnostic of diabetes (3). Women  with gestational diabetes are  at increased risk of some  complications during pregnancy  and delivery, as are their infants.  Gestational diabetes is diagnosed  through prenatal screening,  rather than reported symptoms. RISK FACTORS FOR DIABETES Type 1. The exact causes of  type 1 diabetes are unknown. It  is generally agreed that type 1  diabetes is the result of a complex  interaction between genes and  environmental factors, though  no specific environmental risk  factors have been shown to cause  a significant number of cases. The  majority of type 1 diabetes occurs  in children and adolescents. Type 2. The risk of type 2 diabetes  is determined by an interplay of  genetic and metabolic factors.  Ethnicity, family history of  diabetes, and previous gestational  diabetes combine with older age,  overweight and obesity, unhealthy  diet, physical inactivity and  smoking to increase risk. Excess body fat, a summary  measure of several aspects of diet  and physical activity, is the strongest  risk factor for type 2 diabetes, both  in terms of clearest evidence base  and largest relative risk. Overweight  and obesity, together with physical  inactivity, are estimated to cause  a large proportion of the global  diabetes burden (4). Higher waist  circumference and higher body mass  index (BMI) are associated with  increased risk of type 2 diabetes,  though the relationship may  vary in different populations  (5).  Populations in South-East Asia,  for example, develop diabetes at a  lower level of BMI than populations  of European origin (6). Several dietary practices are linked  to unhealthy body weight and/or  type 2 diabetes risk, including  high intake of saturated fatty  acids, high total fat intake and  inadequate consumption of dietary  fibre (7, 8, 9). High intake of sugarsweetened beverages, which  contain considerable amounts  of free sugars, 1 increases the  likelihood of being overweight  or obese, particularly among  children (10, 11). Recent evidence  further suggests an association  between high consumption of  sugar-sweetened beverages and  increased risk of type 2 diabetes  (7, 12, 13, 14). Early childhood nutrition affects  the risk of type 2 diabetes later in  life. Factors that appear to increase  risk include poor fetal growth,  low birth weight (particularly if  followed by rapid postnatal catchup growth) and high birth weight  (15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21). Active (as distinct from passive)  smoking increases the risk of  type 2 diabetes, with the highest  risk among heavy smokers (22).  Risk remains elevated for about  1. This includes “all monosaccharides  and disaccharides added to foods by  the manufacturer, cook, or consumer,  plus sugars naturally present in honey,  syrups, and fruit juices”. Source: Joint  WHO/FAO Expert Consultation, WHO  Technical Report Series 916 Diet,  Nutrition, and the Prevention of Chronic  Diseases. Geneva, WHO, 2003. Overweight and  obesity are the  strongest risk factors  for type 2 diabetes

## Page 13

13 Background 10 years after smoking cessation,  falling more quickly for lighter  smokers (23). Gestational diabetes. Risk factors  and risk markers for GDM include  age (the older a woman of  reproductive age is, the higher  her risk of GDM); overweight or  obesity; excessive weight gain  during pregnancy; a family history  of diabetes; GDM during a previous  pregnancy; a history of stillbirth  or giving birth to an infant with  congenital abnormality; and excess  glucose in urine during pregnancy  (24). Diabetes in pregnancy and  GDM increase the risk of future  obesity and type 2 diabetes  in offspring. COMPLICATIONS OF DIABETES When diabetes is not well  managed, complications develop  that threaten health and endanger  life. Acute complications are a  significant contributor to mortality,  costs and poor quality of life.  Abnormally high blood glucose  can have a life-threatening impact  if it triggers conditions such as  diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) in  types 1 and 2, and hyperosmolar  coma in type 2. Abnormally low  blood glucose can occur in all  types of diabetes and may result in  seizures or loss of consciousness. It  may happen after skipping a meal  or exercising more than usual,  or if the dosage of anti-diabetic  medication is too high. Over time diabetes can damage  the heart, blood vessels, eyes,  kidneys and nerves, and increase  the risk of heart disease and  stroke. Such damage can result  in reduced blood flow, which –  combined with nerve damage  (neuropathy) in the feet – increases  the chance of foot ulcers, infection  and the eventual need for limb  amputation. Diabetic retinopathy  is an important cause of blindness  and occurs as a result of longterm accumulated damage to the  small blood vessels in the retina.  Diabetes is among the leading  causes of kidney failure. Uncontrolled  diabetes  in  pregnancy can have a devastating  effect on both mother and  child, substantially increasing  the risk of fetal loss, congenital  malformations, stillbirth, perinatal  death, obstetric complications,  and maternal morbidity and  mortality. Gestational diabetes  increases the risk of some adverse  outcomes for mother and offspring  during pregnancy, childbirth  and immediately after delivery  (pre-eclampsia and eclampsia in  the mother; large for gestational  age and shoulder dystocia in  the offspring) (25). However, it  is not known what proportion of  obstructed births or maternal and  perinatal deaths can be attributed  to hyperglycaemia. The combination of increasing  prevalence of diabetes and  increasing lifespans in many  populations with diabetes may be  leading to a changing spectrum  of the types of morbidity that  accompany diabetes. In addition  to the traditional complications  described above, diabetes has  been associated with increased  rates of specific cancers, and  increased rates of physical and  cognitive disability (26). This  diversification of complications  and increased years of life spent  with diabetes indicates a need to  better monitor the quality of life  of people with diabetes and assess  Diabetes can damage  the heart, blood  vessels, eyes, kidneys  and nerves, leading  to disability and  premature death

## Page 14

14 Background the impact of interventions on  quality of life. ECONOMIC IMPACT OF DIABETES Diabetes imposes a large economic  burden on the global health-care  system and the wider global  economy. This burden can be  measured through direct medical  costs, indirect costs associated  with productivity loss, premature  mortality and the negative impact  of diabetes on nations’ gross  domestic product (GDP). Direct medical costs associated  with diabetes include expenditures  for preventing and treating  diabetes and its complications.  These include outpatient and  emergency care; inpatient hospital  care; medications and medical  supplies such as injection devices  and self-monitoring consumables;  and long-term care. Based on cost estimates from a  recent systematic review, it has  been estimated that the direct  annual cost of diabetes to the  world is more than US$ 827 billion  (27, 28). The International Diabetes  Federation (IDF) estimates that  total global health-care spending  on diabetes more than tripled  over the period 2003 to 2013 – the  result of increases in the number  of people with diabetes and  increases in per capita diabetes  spending (29). While the major diabetes cost  drivers are hospital inpatient and  outpatient care, a contributing  factor to this increase is the rise in  expenditure on patented, branded  medicines used to treat people  with diabetes, including both new  oral treatments for type 2 diabetes  and analogue insulins 1. None of  these preparations has yet been  included in the WHO Model list  of essential medicines, 2 because  systematic evidence reviews  find that they provide little or no  advantage over cheaper generic  alternatives (30). The increase in total global  diabetes health expenditure is  expected to continue. Low- and  middle- income countries will carry  a larger proportion of this future  global health-care expenditure  burden than high-income countries. Catastrophic medical expenditure.  Besides the economic burden  on the health-care system and  national economy, diabetes can  impose a large economic burden  on people with diabetes and their  families in terms of higher out-ofpocket health-care payments and  loss of family income associated  with disability and premature loss  of life. The relationship between diabetes  and the risk of catastrophic  medical expenditure by individuals  and families has been explored  in 35 developing countries. This  research found that people with  diabetes had a significantly greater  chance of incurring catastrophic  medical expenditure compared  to similar individuals without  diabetes. Health insurance was not  significantly related to lower risks of  1. These are insulins derived from human  insulin by modifying its structure to  change the pharmacokinetic profile. 2. WHO's Model list of essential medicines  comprises a set of medicines that  satisfy the priority health-care needs  of the population, meaning they should  be available at all times, in adequate  amounts and in appropriate dosage  forms, at a price the community  can afford. People  with diabetes are  more likely to incur  catastrophic personal  health expenditure

## Page 15

15 Background catastrophic medical expenditure.  The effects were more marked in  lower-income countries (31). Impact on national economies.  One study estimates that losses  in GDP worldwide from 2011 to  2030, including both the direct and  indirect costs of diabetes, will total  US$ 1.7 trillion, comprising US$ 900  billion for high-income countries  and US$  800 billion for low- and  middle-income countries (32). DIABETES AND THE GLOBAL  PUBLIC HEALTH AGENDA Diabetes is recognized as an  important cause of premature  death and disability. It is one of four  priority noncommunicable diseases  (NCDs) targeted by world leaders  in the 2011 Political Declaration on  the Prevention and Control of NCDs  (33). The declaration recognizes  that the incidence and impacts of  diabetes and other NCDs can be  largely prevented or reduced with  an approach that incorporates  evidence-based,  affordable,  cost-effective, population-wide  and multisectoral interventions.  To catalyse national action, the  World Health Assembly adopted a  comprehensive global monitoring  framework in 2013, comprised of  nine voluntary global targets to  reach by 2025 (see Box 1, page 16).  This was accompanied by the  WHO Global action plan for the  prevention and control of NCDs  2013 – 2020 (WHO NCD Global  Action Plan), endorsed by the 66th  World Health Assembly (34), which  provides a roadmap and policy  options to attain the nine voluntary  global targets. Diabetes and its key  risk factors are strongly reflected  in the targets and indicators of the  global monitoring framework and  the WHO NCD Global Action Plan. These  commitments  were  deepened in 2015 by the United  Nations General Assembly’s  adoption of the 2030 Agenda for  Sustainable Development (35).  In this context, countries have  agreed to take action to achieve  ambitious targets by 2030 – to  reduce premature mortality from  NCDs by one-third; to achieve  universal health coverage; and  to provide access to affordable  essential medicines. To halt the rise in obesity and type 2  diabetes it is imperative to scale-up  population-level prevention. Policy  measures are needed to increase  access to affordable, healthy  foods and beverages; to promote  physical activity; and to reduce  exposure to tobacco. Mass media  campaigns and social marketing  can influence positive change and  make healthy behaviours more the  norm. These strategies have the  potential to reduce the occurrence  of type 2 diabetes and may also  reduce complications associated  with diabetes. To reduce avoidable mortality from  diabetes and improve outcomes,  access to affordable treatment is  critical. Lack of access to insulin in  many countries and communities  remains a critical impediment  to successful treatment efforts.  Inadequate  access  to  oral  hypoglycaemic medication, and  medication to control blood  pressure and lipids, is also a  barrier. Improved management in  primary care with ongoing support  by community health workers can  lead to better control of diabetes  and fewer complications. This report builds on ongoing global  work to address NCDs. It aims  to draw focused attention to the  Diabetes is 1 of 4  priority NCDs  targeted by  world leaders

## Page 16

16 Background public health challenge of diabetes  and to generate momentum for  national, regional and global action.  Part 1 presents an overview of  the global prevalence of diabetes,  the burden of mortality related to  blood glucose, and what is known  about the extent of diabetesrelated complications. Part 2  reviews evidence for action to  prevent type 2 diabetes through  population-wide and targeted  interventions. Part 3 discusses  diagnosis and early detection  of diabetes, along with actions  required to improve outcomes for  those living with it. Part 4 gives the  current status of national responses  to diabetes and provides data  on efforts to monitor, prevent  and manage it (diabetes country  profiles are available at www.who. int/diabetes/global-report). The  final section presents conclusions  and recommendations for realizing  the global commitments made to  prevent diabetes and reduce its  health impact. BOX 1.  VOLUNTARY GLOBAL TARGETS FOR PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF NONCOMMUNICABLE DISEASES TO BE  ATTAINED BY 2025 Source: (34).

## Page 17

17 Background

## Page 18

18 Background REFERENCES 1.	 Definition, Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes Mellitus and its Complications. Part 1: Diagnosis and  Classification of Diabetes Mellitus (WHO/NCD/NCS/99.2). Geneva: World Health Organization; 1999. 2.	 Bellamy L, Casas JP, Hingorani AD, Williams D. Type 2 diabetes mellitus after gestational diabetes: a  systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet. 2009;373:1773–1779. 3.	 Diagnostic criteria and classification of hyperglycaemia first detected in pregnancy (WHO/NMH/ MND/13.2). Geneva: World Health Organization; 2013. 4.	 GBD 2013 Risk Factors Collaborators. Global, regional, and national comparative risk assessment  of 79 behavioural, environmental and occupational, and metabolic risks or clusters of risks in 188  countries, 1990–2013: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2013. Lancet.  2015;386(10010):2287–323. 5.	 Vazquez G, Duval S, Jacobs DR Jr, Silventoinen K. Comparison of body mass index, waist circumference  and waist/hip ratio in predicting incident diabetes: a meta-analysis. Epidemiologic Reviews.  2007;29:115–28. 6.	 Ramachandran A, Ma RC, Snehalatha C. Diabetes in Asia. Lancet. 2010;375:(9712)408–418. 7.	 Ley SH, Hamdy, O, Mohan V, Hu FB. Prevention and management of type 2 diabetes: dietary  components and nutritional strategies. Lancet. 2014;383(9933):1999–2007. 8.	 Fats and fatty acids in human nutrition: report of an expert consultation. FAO Food and Nutrition Paper  91. Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations; 2010. 9.	 Diet, nutrition and the prevention of chronic diseases: report of a Joint WHO/FAO Expert Consultation.  WHO Technical Report Series, No. 916. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2003. 10.	WHO Guideline: sugars intake in adults and children. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2015. 11.	 Te Morenga L, Mallard S, Mann J. Dietary sugars and body weight: systematic review and meta analyses  of randomised controlled trials and cohort studies. British Medical Journal. 2013;346:e7492. 12.	Imamura F, O’Connor L, Ye Z, Mursu J, Hayashino Y, Bhupathiraju SN, Forouhi NG. Consumption of  sugar-sweetened beverages, artificially sweetened beverages, and fruit juice and incidence of type 2  diabetes: systematic review, meta-analysis, and estimation of population attributable fraction. British  Medical Journal. 2015;351:h3576. 13.	The InterAct consortium. Consumption of sweet beverages and type 2 diabetes incidence in European  adults: results from EPIC-InterAct. Diabetologia. 2013;56:1520–30. 14.	Malik VS, Popkin BM, Bray GA, Després J-P, Willett WC, Hu FB. Sugar-sweetened beverages and risk of  metabolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes: a meta-analysis. Diabetes Care. 2010;33:2477–83. 15.	Policy brief: Global nutrition targets 2025: Childhood overweight. Geneva: World Health  Organization; 2014. 16.	Nolan C, Damm P, Prentki Ml. Type 2 diabetes across generations: from pathophysiology to prevention  and management. Lancet. 2011;378(9786):169–181. 17.	 Darnton-Hill I, Nishida C, James WPT. A life-course approach to diet, nutrition and the prevention of  chronic diseases. Public Health Nutrition. 2004;7(1A):101–21. 18.	Diet, nutrition and the prevention of chronic diseases. Report of a Joint WHO/FAO Expert Consultation.  Geneva: World Health Organization; 2003. 19.	 Johnsson, IW, Haglund B, Ahlsson F, Gustafsson J. A high birth weight is associated with increased risk  of type 2 diabetes and obesity. Pediatric Obesity. 2015;10(2):77–83. 20.	Whincup PH, Kaye SJ, Owen CG, et al. Birth weight and risk of type 2 diabetes: a systematic review.  Journal of the American Medical Association. 2008;300:2886–2897. 21.	Harder T, Rodekamp E, Schellong K, Dudenhausen JW, Plagemann A. Birth weight and subsequent risk  of type 2 diabetes: a meta-analysis. American Journal of Epidemiology. 2007;165:849–857.

## Page 19

19 Background 22.	Willi C, Bodenmann P, Ghali WA, Faris PD, Cornuz J. Active smoking and the risk of type 2  diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of the American Medical Association.  2007;298:(22)2654–2664. 23.	Luo J, Rossouw J, Tong E, Giovino GA, Lee CC, Chen C, et al. Smoking and diabetes: does the increased  risk ever go away? American Journal of Epidemiology. 2013;178:(6)937–945. 24.	Anna V, van der Ploeg HP, Cheung NW, Huxley RR, Bauman AE. Socio-demographic correlates of the  increasing trend in prevalence of gestational diabetes mellitus in a large population of women between  1995 and 2005. Diabetes Care. 2008;31:(12)2288–2293. 25.	Wendland EM, Torloni MR, Falavigna M, Trujillo J, Dode MA, Campos MA, et al. Gestational diabetes  and pregnancy outcomes – a systematic review of the World Health Organization (WHO) and the  International Association of Diabetes in Pregnancy Study Groups (IADPSG) diagnostic criteria. BMC  Pregnancy Childbirth. 2012;12:(1)23. 26.	Wong E, Backholer K, Gearon E, Harding J, Freak-Poli R, Stevenson C, et al. Diabetes and risk of  physical disability in adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinology.  2013;1:(2)106–114. 27.	 NCD Risk Factor Collaboration (NCD-RisC). Worldwide trends in diabetes since 1980: a pooled analysis  of 751 population-based studies with 4*4 million participants. Lancet 2016; published online April 7.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(16)00618-8. 28.	Seuring T, Archangelidi O, Suhrcke M. The economic costs of type 2 diabetes: A global systematic  review. PharmacoEconomics. 2015; 33(8): 811–31. 29.	IDF Diabetes Atlas, 6th ed. Brussels, International Diabetes Federation; 2013. 30.	Singh SR, Ahmad F, Lal A, Yu C, Bai Z, Bennett H. Efficacy and safety of insulin analogues for  the management of diabetes mellitus: a meta-analysis. Canadian Medical Association Journal.  2009;180: (4)385–397. 31.	 Smith-Spangler CM, Bhattacharya J, Goldhaber-Fiebert JD. Diabetes, its treatment, and catastrophic  medical spending in 35 developing countries. Diabetes Care. 2012;35:(2)319–326. 32.	Bloom DE, Cafiero ET, Jané-Llopis E, Abrahams-Gessel S, Bloom LR, Fathima S, et al. The global  economic burden of noncommunicable diseases (Working Paper Series). Geneva: Harvard School of  Public Health and World Economic Forum; 2011. 33.	Resolution 66/2. Political Declaration of the High-Level Meeting of the General Assembly on the  Prevention and Control of Noncommunicable Diseases. In Sixty-sixth session ofthe United Nations  General Assembly. New York: United Nations; 2011. 34.	Global action plan for the prevention and control of noncommunicable diseases 2013-2020. Geneva:  World Health Organization; 2013. 35.	Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (A/RES/70/1). New York: United  Nations General Assembly; 2015.

## Page 20

GLOBAL BURDEN OF DIABETES PART 1

## Page 21

21 Global burden of diabetes KEY MESSAGES Diabetes caused 1.5 million deaths in 2012. Higher-than-optimal blood glucose was responsible for an additional 2.2 million  deaths as a result of increased risks of cardiovascular and other diseases, for a  total of 3.7 million deaths related to blood glucose levels in 2012. Many of these deaths (43%) occur under the age of 70. In 2014, 422 million people in the world had diabetes – a prevalence of 8.5%  among the adult population. The prevalence of diabetes has been steadily increasing for the past 3 decades  and is growing most rapidly in low- and middle-income countries. Associated risk factors such as being overweight or obese are increasing. Diabetes is an important cause of blindness, kidney failure, lower limb amputation  and other long-term consequences that impact significantly on quality of life. 1.1  MORTALITY FROM HIGH BLOOD  GLUCOSE, INCLUDING DIABETES In 2012 there were 1.5 million  deaths worldwide directly caused  by diabetes. It was the eighth  leading cause of death among both  sexes and the fifth leading cause of  death in women in 2012 (1). Blood glucose levels that are higherthan-optimal, even if below the  diagnostic threshold for diabetes,  are a major source of mortality and  morbidity. The diagnostic criterion  for diabetes is fasting plasma  glucose ≥ 7.0 mmol/L – a diagnostic  point selected on the basis of  micro-vascular complications such  as diabetic retinopathy. The risk  of macro-vascular disease, such as  heart attack or stroke, however,  starts increasing well before this  diagnostic point (2, 3). To better  understand the full impact of  blood glucose levels on mortality  therefore requires a look at  mortality related to blood glucose  as a risk factor. The total burden of deaths from  high blood glucose 1 in 2012 has  been estimated to amount to  3.7 million. This number includes  1.5 million diabetes deaths, and an  additional 2.2 million deaths from  1. High blood glucose is defined as a  distribution of fasting plasma glucose  in a population that is higher than the  theoretical distribution that would  minimize risks to health (derived  from epidemiological studies). Further  details on the values used to calculate  the estimates presented here can be  found in (2). High blood glucose is a  statistical concept, not a clinical or  diagnostic category.

## Page 22

22 Global burden of diabetes FIGURE 1.  PERCENTAGE OF ALL-CAUSE DEATHS ATTRIBUTED TO HIGH BLOOD GLUCOSE, BY AGE AND COUNTRY INCOME GROUP, a 2012 (A) MEN, (B) WOMEN B  (WOMEN) A  (MEN) LOW-INCOME LOWER MIDDLE-INCOME HIGH-INCOME UPPER MIDDLE-INCOME % of total deaths  attributable to high blood glucose 12% 10% 8% 6% 4% 2% 0% 20–29 30–39 40–49 50–59 60–69 70–79 80+  12% 10% 8% 6% 4% 2% 0% a. As categorized by the World Bank for 2012. % of total deaths  attributable to high blood glucose LOW-INCOME LOWER MIDDLE-INCOME HIGH-INCOME UPPER MIDDLE-INCOME 30–39 40–49 50–59 60–69 70–79 80+  20–29

## Page 23

23 Global burden of diabetes to high blood glucose for both  men and women are highest in the  age group 60–69 years. Forty-three per cent of all deaths  attributable to high blood glucose  occur prematurely, before the  age of 70 years – an estimated  1.6 million deaths worldwide.  Globally, high blood glucose  causes about 7% of deaths among  men aged 20–69 and 8% among  women aged 20–69. Figure 2  shows that the percentage of  premature deaths attributable to  high blood glucose is higher in  low- and middle-income countries  than in high-income countries, and  higher among men than women. High  blood  glucose  agestandardized mortality rates,  43% of all deaths  due to high blood  glucose occur  before the age of 70 FIGURE 2.  PERCENTAGE OF DEATHS ATTRIBUTED TO HIGH BLOOD GLUCOSE THAT OCCUR AT AGES 20–69 YEARS,  BY SEX AND COUNTRY INCOME GROUP, 2012 cardiovascular diseases, chronic  kidney disease, and tuberculosis  related to higher-than-optimal  blood glucose. Its magnitude  highlights that high blood glucose  causes a large burden of mortality  beyond those deaths directly  caused by diabetes. The largest  number of deaths resulting from  high blood glucose occur in  upper-middle income countries  (1.5 million) and the lowest  number in low-income countries  (0.3 million). After the age of 50, middleincome countries have the highest  proportion of deaths attributed to  high blood glucose, for both men  and women (see Figure 1). Except  in high-income countries, the  proportion of deaths attributable  MALES FEMALES 60% 50% 40% 30% 20% 10% 0% Low-income Lower  middle-income Upper  middle-income High-income 60.5% 45.6% 32.2% 14.3% 45.2% 32.7% 56.3% 47.5% Percentage of high blood glucose deaths

## Page 24

24 Global burden of diabetes which account for differences in  population structure, are highly  variable across WHO regions  (Table 1). Rates are highest in the  WHO Eastern Mediterranean,  South-East Asia, and African  Regions, and much lower in the  remaining regions. In the WHO  TABLE 1.  HIGH BLOOD GLUCOSE AGE-STANDARDIZED MORTALITY RATES PER 100 000 BY WHO REGION, AGE 20+ Both sexes Female Male African Region 111.3 110.9 111.1 Region of the Americas 72.6 63.9 82.8 Eastern Mediterranean Region 139.6 140.2 138.3 European Region 55.7 46.5 64.5 South-East Asia Region 115.3 101.8 129.1 Western Pacific Region 67 65.8 67.8 European and South-East Asia  Regions and the Region of the  Americas, high blood glucose  mortality rates are considerably  higher for men than for women. During the period 2000–2012 the  proportion of premature deaths  FIGURE 3.  PERCENTAGE OF ALL DEATHS ATTRIBUTABLE TO HIGH BLOOD GLUCOSE FOR ADULTS AGED 20–69 YEARS,  BY WHO REGION AND SEX, FOR YEARS 2000 AND 2012 12% 10% 8% 6% 4% 2% 0% 2012 2000 2000 MEN: WOMEN: 2012 % of total deaths attributable to high blood glucose African Region Region of  the Americas Eastern  Mediterranean  Region European  Region Western Pacific  Region South-East  Asia Region

## Page 25

25 Global burden of diabetes (ages 20–69) attributable to high  blood glucose increased for both  sexes across all WHO regions,  except among women in the  WHO European Region (Figure 3).  The increase in the proportion of  deaths attributable to high blood  glucose was highest in the WHO  Western Pacific Region, where the  total number of deaths attributable  to high blood glucose during this  period also increased from 490 000  to 944 000. 1.2  PREVALENCE OF DIABETES  AND ASSOCIATED RISK FACTORS WHO estimates that, globally,  422 million adults aged over  18 years  were  living  with  diabetes in 2014 (more details  on methodology can be found  in Annex B and reference 4). The  largest numbers of people with  diabetes were estimated for the  WHO South-East Asia and Western  TABLE 2.  ESTIMATED PREVALENCE AND NUMBER OF PEOPLE WITH DIABETES (ADULTS 18+ YEARS) Pacific Regions (see Table 2),  accounting for approximately half  the diabetes cases in the world. The number of people with  diabetes (defined in surveys as  those having a fasting plasma  glucose value of greater than  or equal to 7.0 mmol/L or on  medication for diabetes/raised  blood glucose) has steadily risen  over the past few decades, due to  population growth, the increase in  the average age of the population,  and the rise in prevalence of  diabetes at each age. Worldwide,  the number of people with  diabetes  has  substantially  increased between 1980 and 2014,  rising from 108 million to current  numbers that are around four times  higher (see Table 2). Forty per  cent of this increase is estimated  to result from population growth  and ageing, 28% from a rise in  age-specific prevalences, and 32%  from the interaction of the two (4). In 2014  422  million  adults had diabetes a. Totals include non-Member States. WHO Region Prevalence (%) Number (millions) 1980 2014 1980 2014 African Region 3.1% 7.1% 4 25 Region of the Americas 5% 8.3% 18 62 Eastern Mediterranean Region 5.9% 13.7% 6 43 European Region 5.3% 7.3% 33 64 South-East Asia Region 4.1% 8.6% 17 96 Western Pacific Region 4.4% 8.4% 29 131 Total a 4.7% 8.5% 108 422 Source: (4).

## Page 26

26 Global burden of diabetes 1. Unless otherwise noted, prevalence  estimates reported in this section are  age-standardized. In the past 3 decades the  prevalence 1 (age-standardized)  of diabetes has risen substantially  in countries at all income levels,  mirroring the global increase in  the number of people who are  overweight or obese. The global  prevalence of diabetes has grown  from 4.7% in 1980 to 8.5% in 2014,  during which time prevalence has  increased or at best remained  unchanged in every country (4).  Over the past decade, diabetes  prevalence has risen faster in  low- and middle-income countries  than in high-income countries  (see Figure 4a). The WHO Eastern  Mediterranean  Region  has  experienced the greatest rise in  diabetes prevalence, and is now  the WHO region with the highest  prevalence (13.7%) (see Figure 4b). TYPE 1 DIABETES Distinguishing between type 1  and type 2 diabetes is not always  easy as it often requires relatively  sophisticated laboratory tests for  pancreas function. Distinct global  estimates of diabetes prevalence  for type 1 and type 2 therefore do  not exist. Much of our knowledge of the  incidence of type 1 diabetes  relates to children and has been  generated  by  collaborative  initiatives to develop populationbased, standardized registries  of new cases worldwide, such as  the WHO DIAMOND Project (5).  Globally, these registries recorded  large differences in the incidence  and prevalence of type 1 diabetes,  ranging from over 60 to under  0.5  cases annually per 100 000  children aged under 15 years;  differences in case ascertainment  FIGURE 4A.  TRENDS IN PREVALENCE OF DIABETES, 1980–2014, BY COUNTRY INCOME GROUP 10% 8% 6% 4% 2% 0% 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 Prevalence of diabetes Low-income Lower  middle-income High-income Upper  middle-income World Diabetes prevalence  has doubled since 1980

## Page 27

27 Global burden of diabetes may have contributed to the  variability. Of the study sites in  the WHO DIAMOND project,  type 1 diabetes is most common  in Scandinavian populations and  in Sardinia and Kuwait, and much  less common in Asia and Latin  America (6). Data are generally  lacking for sub-Saharan Africa and  large parts of Latin America. In  the past few decades the annual  incidence appears to be rising  steadily by about 3% in highincome countries (7, 8, 9). TYPE 2 DIABETES AND GESTATIONAL  DIABETES Previously seen mainly in middleaged and elderly people, type 2  diabetes occurs increasingly  frequently in children and young  people. Type 2 diabetes is  often undiagnosed and studies  to assess the number of newly  occurring cases are complicated  and consequently there are almost  no data on true incidence. In highincome countries the prevalence  of type 2 diabetes is frequently  highest among people who are  poor (10). There are few data on  the income gradient of diabetes in  low- and middle-income countries,  but data that exist suggest  that although the prevalence of  diabetes is often highest among  wealthy people, this trend is  reversing in some middle-income  countries (10). The proportion of undiagnosed  type 2 diabetes varies widely – a  recent review of data from seven  countries found that between 24%  FIGURE 4B.  TRENDS IN PREVALENCE OF DIABETES, 1980–2014, BY WHO REGION 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 Prevalence of diabetes 12% 14% 10% 8% 6% 4% 2% 0% African Region European Region South-East  Asia Region Western  Pacific Region World Region of  the Americas Eastern Mediterranean Region

## Page 28

28 Global burden of diabetes and 62% of people with diabetes  were undiagnosed and untreated  (11). Analysis of data from WHOsupported STEPS surveys in  11  countries underscores the  wide variation in the proportion  of people undiagnosed and  untreated: among people whose  measured blood glucose was at  or above the diagnostic threshold  for diabetes, between 6% and 70%  had been diagnosed with diabetes,  and between 4% and 66% were  taking medication to lower their  blood glucose (12). Even in highincome countries the proportion  of undiagnosed diabetes can be  as high as 30–50% (13). The frequency of previously  undiagnosed diabetes in pregnancy  and gestational diabetes varies  among populations but probably  affects 10–25% of pregnancies  (14). It has been estimated that  most (75–90%) of cases of high  blood glucose during pregnancy  are gestational diabetes (15). ASSOCIATED RISK FACTORS Regular physical activity reduces  the risk of diabetes and raised  blood  glucose,  and  is  an  important contributor to overall  energy balance, weight control  and obesity prevention – all  risk exposures linked to future  diabetes prevalence (16). The  global target of a 10% relative  reduction in physical inactivity is  therefore strongly associated with  the global target of halting the risk  in diabetes. However, the prevalence of  physical inactivity globally is of  increasing concern. In 2010, the  latest year for which data are  available, just under a quarter  of all adults aged over 18 years  did not meet the minimum  recommendation for physical  activity per week and were  classified as insufficiently physically  active (16). In all WHO regions and  across all country income groups  women were less active than men,  with 27% of women and 20% of  men classified as insufficiently  physically active. Physical inactivity  is alarmingly common among  adolescents, with 84% of girls and  78% of boys not meeting minimum  requirements for physical activity  for this age. The prevalence of  physical inactivity is highest in  high-income countries where it is  almost double that of low-income  countries. Among WHO regions,  the Eastern Mediterranean Region  showed the highest prevalence  of inactivity in both adults and  adolescents. Being overweight or obese is  strongly linked to diabetes.  Despite the global voluntary  target to halt the rise in obesity by  2025 (16, 17), being overweight or  obese has increased in almost all  countries. In 2014, the latest year  for which global estimates are  available, more than one in three  adults aged over 18 years were  overweight and more than one  in 10 were obese. Women were  more overweight or obese than  men. The prevalence of obesity  was highest in the WHO Region  of the Americas and lowest in the  WHO South-East Asian Region  (see Figure 5a). The proportion  of people who are overweight  or obese increases with country  income level. High- and middleincome countries have more  than double the overweight and  obesity prevalence of low-income  countries (see Figure 5b). More than 1 in 3 adults  were overweight  and more than  1 in 10 were  obese in 2014

## Page 29

29 Global burden of diabetes FIGURE 5A.  PREVALENCE OF BEING OVERWEIGHT (BMI 25+) IN ADULTS OVER 18 YEARS, 2014, BY SEX AND WHO REGION 60% 70% 50% 40% 30% 20% 10% 0% Prevalence of adults overweight Region of  the Americas 62.8% 59.8% Western Pacific  Region 34.7% 31.2% South-East  Asia Region 19.3% 25.3% European  Region 62.6% 54.9% Eastern  Mediterranean  Region 43.8% 50.1% African region 22.9% 38.6% MALES FEMALES FIGURE 5B.  PREVALENCE OF BEING OVERWEIGHT (BMI 25+) IN ADULTS OVER 18 YEARS, 2014, BY SEX AND COUNTRY INCOME GROUP 60% 70% 50% 40% 30% 20% 10% 0% Prevalence of adults overweight Low-income Lower  middle-income Upper  middle-income High-income 15.4% 26.9% 24.2% 61.5% 52.2% 31.3% 43.3% 42.7% MALES FEMALES

## Page 30

30 Global burden of diabetes 1.3  BURDEN AND TRENDS IN THE  COMPLICATIONS OF DIABETES Diabetes, if not well controlled,  may cause blindness, kidney failure,  lower limb amputation and several  other long-term consequences that  impact significantly on quality of  life. There are no global estimates  of diabetes-related end-stage renal  disease, cardiovascular events,  lower-extremity amputations or  pregnancy complications, though  these conditions affect many  people living with diabetes. Where  data are available – mostly from  high-income countries – prevalence,  incidence and trends vary hugely  between countries (18, 19). LOSS OF VISION Diabetic retinopathy caused  1.9% of moderate or severe  visual impairment globally and  2.6% of blindness in 2010 (20).  Studies suggest that prevalence  of any retinopathy in persons with  diabetes is 35% while proliferative  (vision-threatening) retinopathy  is 7% (21). However, retinopathy  rates are higher among: people  with type 1 diabetes; people  with longer duration of diabetes;  Caucasian populations; and  possibly among people of lower  socioeconomic status (21). END-STAGE RENAL DISEASE Pooled data from 54 countries  show that at least 80% of cases of  end-stage renal disease (ESRD) are  caused by diabetes, hypertension  or a combination of the two  (18). The proportion of ESRD  attributable to diabetes alone  ranges from 12–55%. The incidence  of ESRD is up to 10 times as high  in adults with diabetes as those  without. The prevalence of ESRD  is heavily dependent on access  to dialysis and renal replacement  therapy – both of which are highly  variable between (and in some  cases within) countries. CARDIOVASCULAR EVENTS Adults with diabetes historically  have a two or three times higher  rate of cardiovascular disease  (CVD) than adults without diabetes  (22). The risk of cardiovascular  disease increases continuously  with rising fasting plasma glucose  levels, even before reaching  levels sufficient for a diabetes  diagnosis (2, 3). The few countries  in north America, Scandinavia  and the United Kingdom of Great  Britain and Northern Ireland that  have studied time trends in the  incidence of cardiovascular events  (myocardial infarction, stroke  or CVD mortality) report large  reductions over the past 20 years  among people with type 1 or  type 2 diabetes (23), although less  than the reduction in the nondiabetic population. This decrease  has been attributed to reduction  in the prevalence of smoking and  better management of diabetes  and associated CVD risk factors. LOWER EXTREMITY AMPUTATIONS Diabetes appears to dramatically  increase the risk of lower extremity  amputation because of infected,  non-healing foot ulcers (19). Rates  of amputation in populations with  diagnosed diabetes are typically  10 to 20 times those of nondiabetic populations, and over the  past decade have ranged from 1.5  to 3.5 events per 1000 persons per  Lower limb amputation  rates are 10 to 20 times  higher among people  with diabetes

## Page 31

31 Global burden of diabetes year in populations with diagnosed  diabetes. Encouragingly several  studies show a 40% to 60%  reduction in rates of amputations  among adults with diabetes  during the past 10–15 years in  the United Kingdom, Sweden,  Denmark, Spain, the United States  of America and Australia (19). No  such data estimates exist for low-  or middle-income countries. 1.4 SUMMARY The number of people in the world  with diabetes has quadrupled since  1980. Population growth and ageing  have contributed to this increase,  but are not solely responsible for it.  The prevalence (age-standardized)  of diabetes is growing in all regions.  Global prevalence doubled from  1980 to 2014, mirroring a rise in  overweight and obesity. Prevalence  is growing most rapidly in low- and  middle-income countries. Blood glucose levels begin to  have an impact on morbidity and  mortality even below the diagnostic  threshold for diabetes. Diabetes  and higher-than-optimal blood  glucose together are responsible  for 3.7 million deaths, many of  which could be prevented. The  numbers  and  trends  presented in this section have  implications for the health and  well-being of populations, and for  health systems. The complications  of diabetes have significant  impact on the individuals who  experience them and their impact  is also felt at population level.  Diabetes is a serious threat to  population health.

## Page 32

32 Global burden of diabetes REFERENCES 1.	 WHO Mortality Database [online database]. Geneva: World Health Organization; (http://apps.who.int/ healthinfo/statistics/mortality/causeofdeath_query/, accessed 12 January 2016). 2.	 Singh GM, Danaei G, Farzadfar F, Stevens GA, Woodward M, Wormser D et al. The age-specific  quantitative effects of metabolic risk factors on cardiovascular diseases and diabetes: a pooled analysis.  PLoS One 2013; 8(7):e65174. 3.	 Danaei G, Lawes CM, Vander HS, Murray CJ, Ezzati M. Global and regional mortality from ischaemic  heart disease and stroke attributable to higher-than-optimum blood glucose concentration: comparative  risk assessment. Lancet. 2006;368:(9548)1651–1659. 4.	 NCD Risk Factor Collaboration (NCD-RisC). Worldwide trends in diabetes since 1980: a pooled analysis  of 751 population-based studies with 4*4 million participants. Lancet 2016; published online April 7.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(16)00618-8. 5.	 Incidence and trends of childhood type 1 diabetes worldwide, 1990–1999. Diabetes Medicine.  2006;23:(8)857–866. 6.	 Tuomilehto J. The emerging global epidemic of type 1 diabetes. Current Diabetes Reports. 2013;13:  (6)795–804. 7.	 Patterson CC, Dahlquist GG, Gyurus E, Green A, Soltesz G. EURODIAB Study Group Incidence trends  for childhood type 1 diabetes in Europe during 1989–2003 and predicted new cases 2005–20: a  multicentre prospective registration study. Lancet. 2009;373:2027–2033. 8.	 Dabelea D. The accelerating epidemic of childhood diabetes. Lancet. 2009;373:(9680)1999–2000. 9.	 Gale EAM. The rise of childhood type 1 diabetes in the 20th century. Diabetes. 2002;51:3353–3361. 10.	Diabetes: equity and social determinants. In Equity, social determinants and public health programmes.  Blas E, Kuru A, eds. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2010. 11.	 Gakidou E, Mallinger L, Abbott-Klafter J, Guerrero R, Villalpando S, Ridaura RL, et al. Management  of diabetes and associated cardiovascular risk factors in seven countries: a comparison of data from  national health examination surveys. Bulletin of the World Health Organization. 2011);89:(3)172–183. 12.	Tracking universal health coverage: first global monitoring report. Geneva: World Health  Organization; 2015. 13.	Beagley J, Guariguata L, Weil C, Motala AA. Global estimates of undiagnosed diabetes in adults. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2014;103: 150–160. 14.	Jiwani A, Marseille E, Lohse N, Damm P, Hod M, Kahn JG. Gestational diabetes mellitus: results from  a survey of country prevalence and practices. Journal of Maternal-Fetal Neonatal Medicine. 2012;25:  (6)600–610. 15.	Guariguata L, Linnenkamp U, Beagley J, Whiting DR, Cho NH.  Global estimates of the prevalence of  hyperglycaemia in pregnancy. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2014;103, (2) 176–185. 16.	Global status report on noncommunicable diseases 2015. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2015. 17.	 Global action plan for the prevention and control of noncommunicable diseases 2013–2020. Geneva:  World Health Organization; 2013. 18.	United States Renal Data System. International Comparisons. In United States Renal Data System.  2014 USRDS annual data report: Epidemiology of kidney disease in the United States. Bethesda  (MD): National Institutes of Health, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases;  2014:188–210. 19.	 Moxey PW, Gogalniceanu P, Hinchliffe RJ, Loftus IM, Jones KJ, Thompson MM, et al. Lower extremity  amputations – a review of global variability in incidence. Diabetic Medicine. 2011;28:(10)1144–1153.

## Page 33

33 Global burden of diabetes 20.	Bourne RR, Stevens GA, White RA, Smith JL, Flaxman SR, Price H, et al. Causes of vision loss worldwide,  1990–2010: a systematic analysis. Lancet Global Health. 2013;1:(6)e339-e349. 21.	Yau JW, Rogers SL, Kawasaki R, Lamoureux EL, Kowalski JW, Bek T, et al. Global prevalence and major  risk factors of diabetic retinopathy. Diabetes Care. 2012;35:(3)556–564. 22.	Emerging Risk Factors Collaboration. Sarwar N, Gao P, Seshasai SR, Gobin R, Kaptoge S, Di  Angelantonio E. Diabetes mellitus, fasting blood glucose concentration, and risk of vascular disease: a  collaborative meta-analysis of 102 prospective studies. Lancet. 2010 Jun 26;375(9733):2215–22. 23.	Barengo NC, Katoh S, Moltchanov V, Tajima N, Tuomilehto J. The diabetes-cardiovascular risk  paradox: results from a Finnish population-based prospective study. European Heart Journal.  2008;29:(15)1889–1895.

## Page 34

PREVENTING DIABETES PART 2

## Page 35

35 Preventing diabetes The vast majority of the world’s  diabetes cases are type 2 (1). Some  risk factors for type 2 diabetes –  such as genetics, ethnicity and  age – are not modifiable. Others,  such as being overweight or  obese, unhealthy diet, insufficient  physical activity and smoking are  modifiable through behavioural  and environmental changes.  Several effective policy options  are available to facilitate these  behavioural changes and create  supportive environments for  healthy lifestyles. At the individual  level, intensive interventions to  improve diet and physical activity  can prevent or delay the onset  of type 2 diabetes in people at  high risk. 2.1  POPULATION-BASED  PREVENTION There are strong indications – if  not yet direct evidence – that  population-based programmes  aimed at modifiable risk factors can  reduce the incidence of diabetes  while also lowering blood pressure  and other cardiovascular risk  factors. Population-based data from  Cuba show a fall in type 2 diabetes  during a period of economic crisis  when the population experienced  a reduction in calorie intake and a  simultaneous increase in physical  activity (2), suggesting populationwide changes in diet and physical  activity do affect type 2 diabetes  prevalence. Actions to address overweight and  obesity are critical to preventing  type 2 diabetes. Evidence on  what works as a package of  interventions for the prevention  of overweight and obesity is  limited, but much is known about  promotion of healthy diet and  physical activity, which are key  to prevention and attaining the  global obesity and diabetes target  (see Box 1, page 16). Promoting  healthy diets and increasing  KEY MESSAGES Type 2 diabetes is largely preventable. Multisectoral, population-based approaches are needed to reduce the prevalence  of modifiable diabetes risk factors – such as overweight, obesity, physical  inactivity and unhealthy diet – in the general population. A combination of fiscal policies, legislation, changes to the environment and  raising awareness of health risks works best for promoting healthier diets and  physical activity. Diabetes can be delayed or prevented in people who are overweight and have  impaired glucose tolerance (IGT). Diet and physical activity interventions are more  effective than medication.

## Page 36

36 Preventing diabetes physical activity in the population  will help reduce the occurrence of  obesity and type 2 diabetes, and  will accrue additional benefits by  reducing complications among  people with all types of diabetes  and glucose intolerance. WHO’s  recommendations for healthy diet  and physical activity relevant to  diabetes are summarized in Box 2. Population-level interventions to  reduce tobacco use may contribute  to prevention of type 2 diabetes,  given emerging evidence of a  link between smoking and type 2  diabetes risk. Active tobacco use  BOX 2.  HEALTHY DIET AND PHYSICAL ACTIVITY Adults can reduce their risk of type 2 diabetes and improve insulin sensitivity and glucose uptake  through regular and adequate levels of physical activity and healthy diets that include sufficient  consumption of dietary fibre, and replacing saturated fatty acids with polyunsaturated fatty acids.  WHO has developed recommendations on healthy diet and physical activity that, if implemented,  can reduce an individual’s risk of type 2 diabetes and other NCDs. Dietary recommendations by WHO and the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) for the  prevention of type 2 diabetes include limiting saturated fatty acid intake to less than 10% of total  energy intake (and for high risk groups, less than 7%); and achieving adequate intakes of dietary  fibre (minimum daily intake of 20 g) through regular consumption of wholegrain cereals, legumes,  fruits and vegetables (3). WHO is currently updating its guidelines on fat intake and carbohydrate  intake, which will include recommendations on dietary fibre as well as fruits and vegetables. WHO  strongly recommends reducing the intake of free sugars to less than 10% of total energy intake and  suggests that further reduction to 5% could have additional health benefits (4). WHO recommendations on physical activity are provided for different age groups (5): yy It is recommended that children and youth aged 5–17 years should do at least 60 minutes of  moderate- to vigorous-intensity physical activity daily. yy It is recommended that adults aged 18–64 years should do at least 150 minutes of moderate-intensity  aerobic physical activity (for example brisk walking, jogging, gardening) spread throughout the  week, or at least 75 minutes of vigorous-intensity aerobic physical activity throughout the week, or  an equivalent combination of moderate- and vigorous-intensity activity. yy For older adults the same amount of physical activity is recommended, but should also include  balance and muscle strengthening activity tailored to their ability and circumstances. can be reduced through a set of  legislative, regulatory, fiscal and  educational measures including  graphic warnings on cigarette  packs, bans on advertising  and promotion, raising taxes  on tobacco and implementing  mass media campaigns (6). WHO  Member States have committed  to these and other actions through  WHO’s Framework Convention on  Tobacco Control, which entered  into force in 2005. Reducing  population exposure to tobacco  may also reduce diabetes-related  complications, in part through  reducing cardiovascular risk.

## Page 37

37 Preventing diabetes The rise in diabetes risk factors  has occurred in the context of  changes in the social, economic  and physical environments in which  we are born and live. Populationbased prevention aims not only to  reduce risk factors for diabetes  and NCDs, but also to shape the  broader environments in which  people live, eat, study, work and  play, so that healthy choices are  accessible and easy to make. No single policy or intervention can  achieve changes of this magnitude.  Such an agenda calls for a “wholeof-government” approach, in  which all sectors systematically  consider the health impact of  policies in trade, agriculture,  finance, transport, education and  urban planning – recognizing that  health is enhanced or obstructed  as a result of policies in these and  other areas. A LIFE-COURSE APPROACH TO  PREVENTING DIABETES Taking a life-course perspective  is essential for type 2 diabetes  prevention. Early in life, when  eating and physical activity  habits are formed and when the  long-term regulation of energy  balance may be programmed  (7), there is a critical window for  intervention to mitigate the risk  of obesity and type 2 diabetes  later in life (8). The report of the  WHO Commission on Ending  Childhood Obesity (9) provides  a comprehensive, integrated  package of recommendations to  address childhood obesity that  will contribute to the reduction  of risks for developing type 2  diabetes. A life-course approach  to diabetes would also recognize  the increasing risk that comes with  advancing age, and the need to  identify the unique needs for risk  reduction in older adults. IMPROVING EARLY CHILDHOOD  NUTRITION Strategies to improve early  childhood nutrition should not be  overlooked among type 2 diabetes  prevention efforts. These actions  must be aimed at improving  maternal health and nutritional  status and infant and young childfeeding practices, focusing on the  first 1000 days from a woman’s  pregnancy to her child’s second  birthday (3). Specific measures  include promoting the nutritional  well-being of pregnant women;  promotion of breastfeeding,  including the implementation of  the Code of Marketing of Breast  Milk Substitutes; improving the  nutritional status of infants and  young children through exclusive  breastfeeding up to 6 months of  age; introducing a variety of safe,  nutritious and adequate foods at  6 months of age to complement  breastfeeding (which should  continue until babies are 2 years  of age or more); promoting  growth in height; preventing the  consumption of foods that are  high in energy, fats, sugars and  sodium; and facilitating physical  activity (10). SUPPORTIVE ENVIRONMENTS FOR  PHYSICAL ACTIVITY The physical or built environment  plays an important role in  facilitating physical activity for  many people. Urban planning  and active transport policies can  ensure that walking, cycling and  other forms of non-motorized  Actions to address  overweight and  obesity are critical  to preventing  type 2 diabetes

## Page 38

38 Preventing diabetes transport are accessible and safe  for all. The physical environment  can also provide sports, recreation  and leisure facilities, and ensure  there are adequate safe spaces  for active living for both children  and adults (11). The poorest  groups in society, especially  women, may have less time and  fewer resources to participate in  leisure-time activity, making policy  interventions that target active  transport and incidental physical  activity throughout the day much  more important. Promotion of  stair use – including placement  of physical activity promotion  messages on stairs – as part of a  workplace programme has been  shown to increase awareness and  use of stairs (12). The sports sector can encourage  regular structured activities,  especially among children and  adolescents, and can strengthen  the link between physical activity,  sports and health. Partnerships  with communities, the private  sector and nongovernmental  organizations can also contribute  to developing facilities for  physical activity. SETTINGS-BASED INTERVENTIONS Settings-based interventions  can support diabetes prevention  and control. These interventions  reach families and communities  where they live, study, work  and play to implement both  population-wide and individual  high-risk interventions. Settingsbased  interventions  should  be comprehensive, make use  of existing programmes when  possible and focus on actions  that do not require additional  resources. A whole-of-school approach that  focuses on improving both diet  and physical activity can be very  effective in improving dietary  patterns both inside and outside  school (13). Successful school-based  physical activity interventions  should result in consistent  improvements in the knowledge,  attitudes and behaviour of children  and, when tested, in physical and  clinical outcomes (14). WHO’s  health-promoting schools initiative  has demonstrated the importance  of highlighting both the impact  on attendance and educational  achievement, as well as the health  benefits of a whole-of-school  approach (15). Wo r k p l a c e  i n t e r v e n t i o n s  addressing diet and physical  activity can be effective in  changing behaviours and healthrelated outcomes (16). Healthyeating messages in cafés and  restaurants have been shown to  stimulate consumption of healthy  food − provided that healthy food  items are made available as part  of the intervention (17). Workplaces  can help develop environments  that are conducive to physical  activity at work and provide  incentives and opportunities for  active commuting to and from  work. Workplaces may offer their  employees free or discounted  vouchers for physical activity  facilities. FISCAL, LEGISLATIVE AND REGULATORY  MEASURES FOR HEALTHY DIET Fiscal measures. Price is often  reported as a barrier to people  buying and consuming healthy  foods. Likewise, policy action to  increase the price of foods high  in fat, sugar and salt can decrease  Policies that  increase the price  of foods high in  fat, sugar and salt  can decrease their  consumption

## Page 39

39 Preventing diabetes their consumption (see Box 3).  There is emerging evidence that  appropriately designed fiscal  policies, when implemented  together with other policy actions,  have the potential to promote  healthier diets (18). Fiscal policies  should be considered a key  component of a comprehensive  strategy for prevention and control  of NCDs, including diabetes. Trade and agricultural policies  that promote healthy diets. Trade  measures have proven effective  in reducing the availability of  unhealthy foods and changing  people’s diet. For example, in 2000  Fiji banned the supply of high-fat  mutton flaps under the Trading  Standards Act. Also, in Mauritius,  the reduction of saturated fatty  acids in cooking oil and their  replacement with soya bean oil  is estimated to have changed  consumption patterns for the  best, and reduced average total  cholesterol levels (19). Changes in  agricultural subsidies to encourage  fruit and vegetable production can  be beneficial in increasing their  consumption and improving diet.  Evidence strongly supports the  use of such subsidies and related  policies to facilitate sustained  long-term production, transport  and marketing of healthier  foods (20). Regulation of marketing of  foods high in sugars, fats and  salt. There is ample evidence  that the marketing of foods  and non-alcoholic beverages  influences children’s knowledge,  attitudes, beliefs and preferences.  WHO has developed a set  of recommendations and an  implementation framework on  the marketing of foods and nonalcoholic beverages to children (26).  This aims to assist Member States  in designing and implementing  new policies – or strengthening  existing ones – that regulate the  marketing of food to children. Nutrition labelling is a regulatory  tool that can guide consumers  towards healthier food choices.  BOX 3.  THE “SUGAR-SWEETENED BEVERAGE TAX”, MEXICO The prevalence of overweight and obesity in Mexico stands at more than 33% in children and  around 70% in adults (21). Mexico has the highest prevalence of diabetes among Organization for  Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) member countries (22), and the highest per capita  consumption of soft drinks worldwide (23). In January 2014 Mexico implemented a nationwide tax on drinks containing added sugar (bebidas  azucaradas) that increased their price by over 10%. While it is too early to draw far-reaching  conclusions, one analysis estimated that the 10% increase in the price of added-sugar drinks was  associated with an 11.6% decrease in the quantity consumed (24). During the first year of the tax, purchases of taxed sugar-sweetened beverages decreased by an  average of 6% compared to what would have been expected without implementation of the tax (25),  with higher reductions found in households of low socioeconomic status.

## Page 40

40 Preventing diabetes Nutrition labelling comprises nutrient  declarations and supplementary  nutrition information commonly  referred to as front-of-pack labelling.  The nutrient declarations provide  quantitative information and  usually appear on small print on  the back of packages; front-of-pack  labelling is designed to assist in  interpreting nutrient declarations.  Front-of-pack labelling may also  encourage manufacturers to make  the composition of retail food  products healthier, to achieve  competitive advantages or to  avoid unfavourable disclosures  about food composition. There is  evidence that simple, front-of-pack  labels on packaged foods, or pointof-purchase information in grocery  stores, cafés or restaurants, can  be beneficial to support healthier  options, as can menu labelling (27). EDUCATION, SOCIAL MARKETING AND  MOBILIZATION Consumer  awareness  and  knowledge of healthy diet and  physical activity can be achieved  through sustained media and  educational campaigns aimed at  increasing consumption of healthy  foods (or reducing consumption  of less healthy ones), and  increasing physical activity. These  campaigns have greater impact  and are more cost-effective when  used within multicomponent  strategies (28). For example, a  social marketing campaign in  Tonga using netball to promote  physical activity among women as  part of a national NCD campaign  has  resulted  in  increased  participation both in netball and  leisure-time physical activity by  women (29). 2.2 PREVENTING DIABETES IN  PEOPLE AT HIGH RISK Research in different parts of the  world has shown that intensive  interventions that change people’s  diet, increase physical activity and  lead to the loss of excess body  weight can prevent type 2 diabetes  in people with impaired glucose  tolerance, with or without impaired  fasting glucose. For example, the  Diabetes Prevention Program  (DPP) in the USA (30), the Finnish  Diabetes Prevention Study (DPS)  (31) and the Chinese Da Qing Study  showed that active intervention,  lasting 2 to 6 years, could have  extended benefits for glycaemic  and cardiovascular outcomes that  last for 10 to 20 years (32). S e v e r a l  p h a r m a c o l o g i c a l  interventions (for example,  metformin and acarbose) have  also been shown to prevent or  delay type 2 diabetes but, in the  majority of studies, this is not as  effective as changes in diet and  physical activity, and the effect  dissipates after discontinuation  of the medication (33, 34). Knowledge gained from these  proof-of-concept studies confirms  that type 2 diabetes can be  delayed or prevented, but turning  this knowledge into largescale impact brings significant  challenges. The success of these  programmes depends on the  feasibility of identifying, assessing  and successfully involving highrisk groups (see Box 4). Careful  decisions are required about how  to assess diabetes risk, how to  support those identified as highrisk, and how to ensure care for  those diagnosed with diabetes  as a result of the risk assessment.  The individual or high-risk  Interventions  that promote healthy  diet, physical activity  and weight loss  can prevent type 2  diabetes in people  at high risk

## Page 41

41 Preventing diabetes BOX 4.  EXAMPLES OF TOOLS TO ASSESS THE RISK OF HAVING CURRENT OR FUTURE DIABETES Measurement of blood glucose remains the best predictor of type 2 diabetes risk, though a wide  and ever-increasing range of biomarkers has been reported to predict future development of type 2  diabetes. The risk of having or developing type 2 diabetes can also be assessed using tools that  cover variables such as age, sex, history of GDM and family history of diabetes, as well as clinical  measures of body mass index, waist circumference and waist-hip ratio. Several tools that assess the  risk of having undiagnosed or future diabetes have been developed and adapted for use in diverse  populations: yy FINRISK: a simple score adapted for use in several countries, using age, BMI, waist circumference,  history of anti-hypertensive drug treatment and high blood glucose, physical activity, and daily  consumption of fruits, berries or vegetables to estimate risk (35). yy AUSDRISK: a 10-item questionnaire that estimates risk of progression to type 2 diabetes over  5 years. Its scoring includes questions based on age, sex, ethnicity, family history of diabetes,  history of abnormal glucose metabolism, smoking status, current hypertensive treatment, physical  activity, fruit and vegetable consumption, and waist circumference (36). yy IDRS (Indian Diabetes Risk Score): a simplified risk score for identifying undiagnosed diabetic subjects  using four simple parameters – age, waist circumference, family history of diabetes and physical activity.  IDRS is an inexpensive and simple tool for screening for risk of undiagnosed diabetes (37). approach needs to be translated  into well-defined strategies for  implementation at community  level and in national programmes,  in accordance with available  resources. It has the potential to  overwhelm primary care services,  where the responsibility for  intervention usually lies. There is no universal answer  regarding the advisability of  population screening for type 2  diabetes risk. Assessment of  diabetes risk should not be  confused with the total risk  approach to cardiovascular disease  risk in which diabetes is included  as one component. Diabetes is not  only a risk factor for CVD, it also  has its own specific complications.  However, given the overlap of  diabetes and CVD risk factors,  combined screening for risk of both  conditions is a rational approach.  The decision to systematically look  for people at high risk of diabetes  and CVD is a strategic one specific  to each health-care setting, and  will depend, at least in part, on  the numbers likely to be identified  and the resources available to  adequately deal with them (see  also Chapter 4 for early detection  of undiagnosed diabetes). Whether or not intensive individual  interventions are made available,  and whether or not systematic  assessment of risk is undertaken,  primary health-care services must  be equipped to manage people  with high risk of type 2 diabetes.  Clinical vigilance alone, even in  the absence of systems for early  detection of type 2 diabetes or  systematic risk prediction, will  identify people who are at high

## Page 42

42 Preventing diabetes risk for future development of  type 2 diabetes. These people  should receive (as a minimum)  repeat counselling on weight loss,  diet, physical activity and smoking. While type 2 diabetes is potentially  preventable, the causes and risk  factors for type 1 diabetes remain  unknown and prevention strategies  have not yet been successful  (see Box 5). 2.3 SUMMARY Much type 2 diabetes results from  modifiable risk factors that can  be reduced using a combination  of approaches at population  and individual levels. Creating  supportive policy, social and  physical environments for healthy  lifestyles is a key aspect of type 2  diabetes prevention. Sustaining  the lifestyle changes needed to  reduce risk requires supportive  family and social networks, as well  as an enabling food system and  physical environment. Healthy  food and opportunities for physical  activity must be available and  affordable. BOX 5.  TOWARDS PREVENTION OF TYPE 1 DIABETES A variety of immunological approaches have been successful at preventing a disease similar to human  type 1 diabetes in laboratory animals. As a result, hope has emerged that analogous interventions  in humans might prevent type 1 diabetes or significantly slow the decline in beta cell function  that characterizes the condition. Effective intervention of this nature could significantly reduce the  incidence of type 1 diabetes and its long-term complications, greatly enhancing quality of life for  people living with it. Primary prevention trials involving dietary modification have been conducted with infants identified  through genetic screening as being at highest risk of developing type 1 diabetes. Tested interventions  and factors have included early exposure to cows’ milk; the age of introduction of solid foods;  supplementation with an omega-3 fatty acid; and supplementation with vitamin D. None of the trials  has shown a reduction in type 1 incidence. Other trials have focused on relatives of people with type 1 diabetes. Two large randomized clinical  trials have explored the use of vitamin B6 supplementation in adults and children who are related  to people with type 1 diabetes and are pancreatic islet antibody-positive, with negative results.  Injected insulin and oral insulin have also been explored as preventive interventions in children with  antibodies to insulin. The overall results were negative but a subgroup with the highest concentration  of anti-insulin antibodies at the start of the trial showed some delay in onset. Other approaches, as yet unsuccessful, have been treatment of people at high risk with nasal insulin,  low-dose cyclosporine and with a monoclonal antibody. Source: (38) Much type 2  diabetes results  from risk factors  that can be reduced  using a combination  of approaches at  population and  individual levels.

## Page 43

43 Preventing diabetes The WHO Global NCD Action  Plan 2013–2020 sets out policy  options for reducing modifiable  NCD risk factors. Scaled-up  implementation of these should  reduce the occurrence of type 2  diabetes. Achieving the global  voluntary target to halt the rising  trend of obesity and diabetes  will, however, require innovation  and the scaling-up in particular of  interventions to promote healthy  diets and physical activity, as well  as innovative ways to measure  impact and expand the evidence  base  for  population-wide  prevention. Implementation of effective  strategies to reduce modifiable  risk factors for diabetes and  other NCDs frequently face  powerful industry opposition.  Trade measures and regulatory  policies such as taxes on foods  and beverages; restriction of  marketing of unhealthy foods and  non-alcoholic beverages; and  implementing effective frontof-package labelling frequently  face opposition from industry.  Interference by food and beverage  companies in policy-making and  conflicts of interest can lead to  the adoption of industry selfregulatory schemes that tend to  be less effective than government  regulation. A whole-of-government approach,  and even a whole-of-society  approach, is essential to the success  of most of these strategies. Without  support from the highest level of  government, it may be difficult to  engage effectively with other key  sectors, such as trade, industry,  agriculture and education. As noted by the WHO Commission  on Ending Childhood Obesity, a  comprehensive approach is needed  to change the environmental  factors that encourage weight gain  and obesity (9). Action is required  both to increase physical activity  and healthy diet, and to reduce  sedentary behaviours and intake  of unhealthy foods and beverages.  Particular consideration should  be given to the impact of these  interventions on populations of  lower socioeconomic status, who  often lack access to healthier  foods and opportunities for  physical activity.

## Page 44

44 Preventing diabetes REFERENCES 1.	 Definition, diagnosis and classification of diabetes mellitus and its complications. Part 1: Diagnosis and  classification of diabetes mellitus. WHO/NCD/NCS/99.2. Geneva: World Health Organization; 1999. 2.	 Franco M, Bilal U, Orduñez P, Benet M, Morejon A, Caballero B et al. Population-wide weight loss and  regain in relation to diabetes burden and cardiovascular mortality in Cuba 1980-2010: repeated cross  sectional surveys and ecological comparison of secular trends. British Medical Journal. 2013;346. 3.	 Diet, nutrition and the prevention of chronic diseases. Report of a joint WHO/FAO expert consultation.  WHO Technical Report series No 916. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2003. 4.	 Sugars intake for adults and children. Guidelines. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2015. 5.	 Global recommendations on physical activity for health. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2010. 6.	 Tobacco. WHO Fact Sheet No 339. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2015. 7.	 Vickers MH. Early life nutrition, epigenetics and programming of later life disease. Nutrients.  2014;6:(6)2165–2178. 8.	 Global nutrition targets 2025: Childhood overweight [policy brief]. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2014. 9.	 Commission on Ending Childhood Obesity. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2015. 10.	Darnton-Hill I, Nishida C, James WP. A life course approach to diet, nutrition and the prevention of  chronic diseases. Public Health Nutrition. 2004;7:(1A)101–121. 11.	 Mozaffarian D, Afshin A, Benowitz NL, Bittner V, Daniels SR, Franch HA. Population approaches to  improve diet, physical activity, and smoking habits: a scientific statement from the American Heart  Association. Circulation. 2012;126:(12)1514–1563. 12.	Interventions on diet and physical activity. What works. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2009. 13.	School policy framework: implementation of the WHO global strategy on diet, physical activity and  health. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2008. 14.	Kahn EB, Ramsey LT, Brownson RC, Heath GW, Howze EH, Powell KE, et al. The effectiveness of  interventions to increase physical activity. A systematic review. American Journal of Preventive  Medicine. 2002;22:(4 Suppl)73–107. 15.	Health-promoting schools. A healthy setting for living, learning and working. Geneva: World Health  Organization; 1998. 16.	Task Force on Community Preventive Services. A recommendation to improve employee weight status  through worksite health promotion programs targeting nutrition, physical activity or both. American  Journal of Preventive Medicine. 2009;37:358–359. 17.	 Preventing noncommunicable diseases in the workplace through diet and physical activity. WHO/World  Economic Forum report of a joint event. Geneva: World Health Organization/World Economic Forum; 2008. 18.	Fiscal policy options with potential for improving diets for the prevention of noncommunicable diseases  (NCDs). Geneva: World Health Organization; 2015. 19.	 Uusitalo U, Feskens EJ, Tuomilehto J, Dowse G, Haw U, Fareed D, et al. Fall in total cholesterol  concentration over 5 years in association with changes in fatty acid composition of cooking oil in  Mauritius: cross sectional survey. British Medical Journal. 1996;313:(7064)1044–1046. 20.	Wallinga D. Agricultural policy and childhood obesity: a food systems and public health commentary.  Health Affairs (Millwood). 2010;29:(3)405–410. 21.	Gutierrez J, River-Dommarco J, Shamah-Levy T, et al. Encuesta Nacional de Salud y Nutricion 2012.  Resultados Nacionales [National Health and Nutrition Survey, 2012. National Results].  Mexico: National Institute of Public Health; 2012.

## Page 45

45 Preventing diabetes 22.	Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development. Health at a Glance 2015. Washington DC:  Brookings Institution Press; 2015. 23.	EuroMonitor International. Passport Global Market Information Database  [http://www.euromonitor.com/passport] 24.	Colchero MA, Salgado JC, Unar-Munguia M, Hernandez-Avila M, Rivera-Dommarco JA. Price elasticity  of the demand for sugar-sweetened beverages and soft drinks in Mexico. Economics and Human  Biology. 2015;19:129–137. 25.	Colchero MA, Popkin BM, Rivera JA, Ng SW. Beverage purchases from stores in Mexico under the  excise tax on sugar sweetened beverages: observational study. British Medical Journal. 2016;352:h6704. 26.	Set of recommendations on the marketing of foods and non-alcoholic beverages to children. Geneva:  World Health Organization; 2010. 27.	 Kelly B. Front-of-pack labelling: a comprehensive review. Geneva: World Health Organization (in press). 28.	Cecchini M, Sassi F, Lauer JA, Lee YY, Guajardo-Barron V, Chisholm D. Tackling of unhealthy diets,  physical inactivity, and obesity: health effects and cost-effectiveness. Lancet. 2010;376:(9754)1775–1784. 29.	Turk T, Latu N, Cocker-Palu E, Liavaa V, Vivili P, Gloede S, et al. Using rapid assessment and response to  operationalise physical activity strategic health communication campaigns in Tonga. Health Promotion  Journal of Australia. 2013;24:(1)13–19. 30.	Knowler WC, Barrett-Connor E, Fowler SE, Hamman RF, Lachin JM, Walker EA, et al. Reduction in the  incidence of type 2 diabetes with lifestyle intervention or metformin. New England Journal of Medicine.  2002;346:(6)393–403. 31.	 Uusitupa M, Peltonen M, Lindstrom J, Aunola S, Ilanne-Parikka P, Keinanen-Kiukaanniemi, et al. Ten-year  mortality and cardiovascular morbidity in the Finnish Diabetes Prevention Study – secondary analysis of  the randomized trial. PLoS.One. 2009;4:(5)e5656. 32.	Li G, Zhang P, Wang J, Gregg EW, Yang W, Gong Q, et al. The long-term effect of lifestyle interventions  to prevent diabetes in the China Da Qing Diabetes Prevention Study: a 20-year follow-up study. Lancet.  2008;371:(9626)1783–1789. 33.	Merlotti C, Morabito A, Pontiroli AE. Prevention of type 2 diabetes; a systematic review and metaanalysis of different intervention strategies. Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism. 2014;16:(8)719–727. 34.	Orozco LJ, Buchleitner AM, Gimenez-Perez G, Roque IF, Richter B, Mauricio D. Exercise or exercise  and diet for preventing type 2 diabetes mellitus. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews.  2008;(3):CD003054. 35.	Lindstrom J, Tuomilehto J. The diabetes risk score: a practical tool to predict type 2 diabetes risk.  Diabetes Care. 2003;26:(3)725–731. 36.	Chen L, Magliano DJ, Balkau B, Colagiuri S, Zimmet PZ, Tonkin AM, et al. AUSDRISK: an Australian  type 2 diabetes risk assessment tool based on demographic, lifestyle and simple anthropometric  measures. Medical Journal of Australia. 2010;192:(4)197–202. 37.	 Mohan V, Sandeep S, Deepa M, Gokulakrishnan K, Datta M, Deepa R. A diabetes risk score helps  identify metabolic syndrome and cardiovascular risk in Indians – the Chennai Urban Rural Epidemiology  Study (CURES-38). Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism. 2007;9:(3)337–343. 38.	Skyler JS. in International textbook on diabetes mellitus, 4 ed. Chichester, UK; Wiley Blackwell, 2015,  pp. 541–549.

## Page 46

PART 3 MANAGING DIABETES

## Page 47

47 Managing diabetes KEY MESSAGES People with diabetes can live long and healthy lives if their diabetes is detected  and well-managed. Good management using a standardized protocol can potentially prevent  complications and premature death from diabetes using: a small set of generic  medicines; interventions to promote healthy lifestyles; patient education to  facilitate self-care; regular screening for early detection and treatment of  complications through a multidisciplinary team. Facilities for diabetes diagnosis and management should be available in primary  health-care settings, with an established referral and back-referral system. In countries with a high burden of diabetes and tuberculosis or HIV/AIDS, there  is frequent coexistence of these conditions and integrated management is  recommended. Access to essential medicines (including life-saving insulin) and technologies is  worryingly limited in low- and middle-income countries. Well-structured health services  can provide the key interventions  and regular follow-up necessary  to help people with diabetes  live long and relatively healthy  lives, even though it is a chronic,  progressive disease. Many of these  interventions are known to be  cost-effective or cost-saving, and  are feasible even in low-resource  settings (1, 2, 3). Controlling blood  glucose levels and cardiovascular  disease risk through counselling  to promote a healthy diet and  physical activity, and through  use of medicines, is considered a  “best buy” for reducing the health  impact of NCDs. Encouragingly, reductions in the  rates of several diabetes-related  complications  (amputation,  cardiovascular disease, vision loss,  end-stage renal disease) have been  observed in countries that have  adequate data to examine trends  over time (4). Where reductions in  complications have been observed  at population level they are likely  to be the result of improvements in  the management of key risk factors  such as smoking, blood pressure  and lipid levels, and blood glucose,  along with improvements in the  organization and quality of care. 3.1 DIAGNOSIS AND EARLY  DETECTION The starting point for living well  with diabetes is an early diagnosis  – the longer a person lives with  undiagnosed and untreated  diabetes, the worse the health  outcomes are likely to be. Easy

## Page 48

48 Managing diabetes access to basic diagnostics for  diabetes is therefore essential and  diagnosis should be available in  primary health-care settings. Type 1 diabetes often presents  with symptoms that prompt the  patient to contact health services  –thirst, weight loss and copious  urination. Type 2 diabetes often  shows no symptoms, and some  patients contact health services  because of a complication such  as vision loss, heart attack or  limb gangrene. Type 2 diabetes  develops slowly and there is  often a very long period of time  in which the disease is present but  undetected. Diabetes is diagnosed by measuring  glucose in a blood sample taken  while the patient is in a fasting  state, or 2 hours after a 75 g oral  load of glucose has been taken (see  Annex A). Diabetes can also be  diagnosed by measuring glycated  haemoglobin (HbA1c), even if the  patient is not in a fasting state  (5). HbA1c reflects the average  blood glucose concentration over  the past few weeks, rather than  the blood glucose concentration  at that moment (reflected by  the fasting and 2-hour blood  glucose measurements mentioned  above). However, the test is  more costly than blood glucose  measurement (5). Blood glucose measurement to  diagnose diabetes should be  available at the primary healthcare level. If laboratory analysis  of venous plasma glucose is not  feasible, point-of-care devices that  measure glucose in capillary blood  and meet current International  Standardization Organization  (ISO) standards are an acceptable  alternative. Unfortunately, testing  devices and supplies are often not  available where or when necessary –  one survey found the availability of  blood glucose meters ranged from  21% to 100% in facilities visited in  five developing countries (6). EARLY DETECTION OF TYPE 2 DIABETES Whether people should be  screened or not for type 2 diabetes  is a much-debated question and  currently there is no definitive  evidence from randomized trials  to answer it. Some evidence  suggests there are benefits to  early detection and treatment,  largely because the reduced  lead time between onset and  diagnosis speeds the treatment  of cardiovascular risk factors –  particularly improved management  of lipids and blood pressure (7). The decision to put in place (or  not put in place) systems for  early detection is a strategic one  that depends on a number of  factors. Screening programmes  will increase the number of  clinically diagnosed cases of  type 2 diabetes and as such will  increase the health-care system  workload, not only in dealing with  the process of early detection  but, more importantly, in dealing  with the increased number of  clinically diagnosed cases that will  be found (8). No system should be  established without consideration  of whether local health-care  resources are sufficient to cope  with this extra workload. Simply  adding new cases to a healthcare system without additional  investment will, in the absence of  compensating efficiencies, result in  poorer average care (9). The longer a  person lives with  undiagnosed and  untreated diabetes,  the worse their  health outcomes  are likely to be

## Page 49

49 Managing diabetes 3.2 MANAGEMENT OF DIABETES –  CORE COMPONENTS People with diabetes require  access to systematic, ongoing and  organized care delivered by a team  of skilled health-care providers.  Outcomes can be improved at  the primary care level with basic  interventions involving medication,  health education and counselling,  and consistent follow-up. This  systematic care should include  a periodic review of metabolic  control and complications, an  agreed and continually updated  diabetes care plan, and access  to person-centred care provided  by a multidisciplinary team. New  technologies such as telemedicine  and mobile phone technology are  also increasingly being used and  have the potential to reach remote  areas (see Box 7). While most treatment and tests  can be done at primary care level,  periodic referral for specialist  care is required, for example, for  comprehensive eye examinations,  laser and surgical treatment of eye  complications, complex kidney  function tests, and tests of the  heart and arteries in the limbs.  All cases of acute cardiovascular  disease, diabetic coma, kidney  failure and infected foot ulcers  should be managed in a hospital. BOX 6.  PEN FA’A, SAMOA: ISLAND FAMILIES COME TOGETHER TO COMBAT NCDS, IMPROVE HEALTH AND SAVE LIVES Half of all adults in Samoa are at high risk of developing NCDs such as cancer, diabetes and heart  disease. Despite improvements in overall health over the past few decades, the island has a high  and growing prevalence of NCDs. In response to this public health threat, PEN Fa’a Samoa (an adaptation of WHO PEN protocols),  with support from WHO, was initiated in November 2014 in several demonstration sites. PEN Fa’a  Samoa has three main pillars: early detection of NCDs, NCD management, and increased community  awareness. The model takes advantage of existing community structures where extended families  continue to play a significant role in daily life and culture. Each village in Samoa has a women’s  committee representative whose role is to liaise with government agencies to facilitate early  NCD detection. In communities where the pilot has been implemented, over 92% of the target population has now  been reached, thanks in large part to efforts by women’s committee representatives to inform and  encourage villagers to participate. Of those screened, 12.7% of people aged over 40 years have been  tested and found to have hyperglycaemia. Through the PEN Fa’a Samoa implementation, members  of the community with abnormal results are referred to a management team at the district health  facility and seen by a physician who discusses a management and treatment plan with them, and  prescribes medication and behaviour changes. Trained community women representatives then help  patients carry out their treatment plan. The Ministry of Health and the National Health Service, with  the support of WHO, aim to replicate PEN Fa’a Samoa in more villages on the island to achieve full  implementation by the end of 2016.

## Page 50

50 Managing diabetes National guidelines and management  protocols developed for (or adapted  to) individual settings are useful  tools in achieving a standardized and  consistent management approach.  They should cover these basic  principles of diabetes management: y y Interventions to promote and  support healthy lifestyles,  including healthy diet, physical  activity, avoidance of tobacco  use and harmful use of alcohol. yy Medication for blood glucose  control – insulin or oral hypoglycaemic agents as required. yy Medication to control cardiovascular disease risk. yy Regular exams for early detection  of complications: comprehensive  eye examination 1, measurement  of urine protein, and assessment  of feet for signs of neuropathy. yy Standard criteria for referral of  patients from primary care to  secondary or tertiary care. 1. Comprehensive eye examination  includes visual acuity, intraocular  pressure measurement and dilated  examination of the retina and the  optic nerve head, with retinal imaging  strongly recommended. BOX 7.  IMPROVING DIABETES MANAGEMENT USING MOBILE TECHNOLOGY SMS-based programmes can contribute to the prevention and management of diabetes in a way  that is acceptable to patients and the general population. Interventions studied span the disease  spectrum, using one-way and two-way SMS messages to provide information, medication reminders,  and increase patient-provider communication. Reviews of existing clinical studies indicate that text messaging can be effective in promoting positive  health behaviour change and disease management for people with diabetes (10). When properly designed,  mobile diabetes support has generated a statistically significant improvement in areas such as patient  glycaemic control in the short-term and long-term (over 6 months), and medication adherence (11, 12). The mRamadan initiative, Senegal During Ramadan, a lack of understanding of safe ways to manage the fasting tradition can  lead to severe health problems and complications for people with diabetes. Every year during  Ramadan, health authorities in Senegal witness a peak in the urgent hospitalization of people with  uncontrolled diabetes. The Government of Senegal was keen to use mobile technology to improve access to support during  Ramadan for people with diabetes, and began a programme in 2014 with technical support from WHO  and the International Telecommunications Union (ITU). The programme sent SMS tips and advice to  enrolled diabetics during Ramadan to promote good health behaviours during and between fasting  periods. This included reminders for people to drink at least 1 litre of water each morning before  beginning the fast; information for health-care providers on medication use; and which foods to avoid  when breaking a fast in the evening. In a qualitative review, users reported it as a helpful source of  support. When the mRamadan programme was run in 2015 for a second round the programme saw  12 000 self-recruited users, highlighting demand and the potential for further expansion. 1. Comprehensive eye examination  includes visual acuity, intraocular  pressure measurement and dilated  examination of the retina and the  optic nerve head, with retinal imaging  strongly recommended.

## Page 51

51 Managing diabetes y y Integrated management of  diabetes and other diseases  (see Diabetes and other NCDs,  page 55). The effectiveness of diabetes  management ultimately depends  on people’s compliance with  recommendations and treatment.  Patient education is therefore  an important component of  diabetes management. Patients  need to understand the principles  and importance of a healthy  diet, adequate physical activity,  avoidance of tobacco and harmful  use of alcohol, adherence to  medication, foot hygiene and  appropriate footwear, and the  need for periodic assessment  of metabolic control and the  presence or progression of  complications (13). INTERVENTIONS TO PROMOTE  HEALTHIER EATING AND PHYSICAL  ACTIVITY All people with diabetes need  counselling on healthy diet and  regular physical activity, adapted  to their capabilities. Existing  guidelines for dietary management  of type 2 diabetes do not give  identical  recommendations,  but all agree on: a lower calorie  intake for overweight and obese  patients, and replacing saturated  fats with unsaturated fats (14);  intake of dietary fibre equal to or  higher than that recommended  for the general population (15);  and avoiding added sugars,  tobacco use and excessive use of  alcohol (16). Education of patients  in groups is a cost-effective  strategy (13). It has been suspected for some time  that energy restriction through a  very low-calorie diet can lead to  the reduction of symptoms or to  the reversal of hyperglycaemia  typical of type 2 diabetes – the  reversal may be maintained so  long as weight is not regained (17)  (see Box 8). Energy  restriction  through  bariatric (or metabolic) surgery to  reduce the size of the stomach is  now established as an effective  treatment for severe obesityrelated type 2 diabetes, at least  in communities and health-care  contexts where necessary resources  are available. The disappearance  of diabetes that occurs in a large  number of diabetic patients after  bariatric surgery often happens  within days of surgery, similar  to that which occurs at the  start of a very low-calorie diet,  before weight loss – indicating  the possible role of gut-related  hormones in glucose metabolism.  Depending on the surgical  technique, reduction in excess  body weight ranges from 54–72%  (18). However, many healthcare settings lack the required  resources for this type of surgery,  making such treatment accessible  to only a few. In addition to general health  benefits, physical activity appears  to have a beneficial effect on insulin  action, blood glucose control  and metabolic abnormalities  associated with diabetes. Physical  activity can also be beneficial in  reducing cardiovascular disease  risk factors. Activity should be  regular and ideally combine  aerobic exercise with resistance  training (19). Blood glucose control  is important in  preventing and slowing  the progression of  complications

## Page 52

52 Managing diabetes BLOOD GLUCOSE CONTROL The role of blood glucose control  in preventing the development  and progression of complications  has been proven in both type 1  and type 2 diabetes, with an  especially strong relationship  between intensive blood glucose  control and neuropathy and diabetic  retinopathy (20, 21). In most patients  with diabetes, blood glucose levels  can be adequately managed with  medicines included in the WHO  Model list of essential medicines  (22). These are metformin, gliclazide,  and short-acting and intermediateacting human or animal insulin. Blood glucose control should  be monitored through regular  measurement.  People  with  type 1 diabetes and gestational  diabetes need strict control of  blood glucose which is difficult to  accomplish and monitor in primary  health care, so they will need more  frequent referral to higher levels of  health care. Glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c)  is the method of choice for  BOX 8.  REVERSING TYPE 2 DIABETES, BARBADOS Barbados has a 19% prevalence of diabetes among adults. One in three adults is obese; two out of  three are overweight or obese; and under one in 10 adults eats five or more portions of fresh fruit  and vegetables a day. The Barbados Diabetes Reversal Study is designed to test the feasibility of an 8-week, low-calorie  diet, with follow-up support for 6 months on diet and physical activity, to reverse type 2 diabetes. Ten men and 15 women aged 26–68 years participated in the study. All had been diagnosed with  type 2 diabetes in the previous 6 years, none was on insulin, and their body mass indices ranged  from 27–53. All glucose-lowering medication ceased at the start of the study. Participants consumed  a predominantly liquid diet consisting of four portions a day, each of 190 calories. Participants were  also encouraged to eat low-carbohydrate, high-fibre vegetables. By week 8, average weight loss was 10 kg. Several people saw improvements in blood glucose levels  and in blood pressure. Three months after finishing the 8-week diet, 17 participants had fasting  plasma glucose (FPG) below the diagnostic threshold for diabetes compared to three at the start,  and despite remaining off glucose-lowering medication. For nine of the 12 participants on medication  for hypertension at the start of the study, blood pressure fell sufficiently that they could stop taking  hypertension medication by the 8th week. Participants have so far articulated several challenges in participating in the study, including the monotony  of the low-calorie diet phase, the high cost of fresh fruits and vegetables, and feeling poorly equipped to  prepare non-starchy vegetables, even with provided recipes. There was resounding agreement that the  most challenging times are in social settings, where there is peer pressure to consume food and drink. A key element of the programme’s success has been the support participants have received from family,  friends and each other (particularly through the use of social media). However, their experiences also  demonstrate the everyday difficulties of undertaking this approach in a context of widespread obesity.

## Page 53

53 Managing diabetes monitoring glycaemic control in  diabetes. An advantage of using  HbA1c is that the patient does not  need to be in a fasting state. Ideally  it should be measured twice a year  in people with type 2 diabetes  and more frequently in those with  type 1 diabetes. However, HbA1c  testing is more costly than glucose  measurement, and therefore less  readily available. If HbA1c testing is  not available, fasting or post-meal  blood glucose is an acceptable  substitute. Self-monitoring of blood glucose  is recommended for patients  receiving insulin, and to have a  plan of action with their health  provider on how to adjust insulin  dosage, food intake and physical  activity according to their blood  glucose levels. Availability of  self-monitoring devices and strips  has not been assessed globally.  Anecdotal evidence suggests that  self-monitoring is not available  for a vast majority of people on  insulin treatment – cost being  cited as the most frequent reason.  Some data indicate that less  costly self-monitoring by urine  glucose measurement could be  an acceptable alternative when  blood glucose self-monitoring is  not possible (23). MEDICATION FOR ASSOCIATED  CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE RISK  FACTORS Comprehensive reduction of  cardiovascular disease risk factors,  including the control of blood  pressure and lipids in addition to  blood glucose, is of vital importance  in preventing the development of  cardiovascular disease in diabetes,  but also in preventing microvascular  complications. This can be achieved  with generic medicines from WHO  Model list of essential medicines  (22) (thiazide diuretic, ACE-inhibitor,  beta blockers, statin). SCREENING FOR EARLY DETECTION AND  TREATMENT OF COMPLICATIONS Current treatment of diabetes does  not prevent all complications, but  the progress of complications can  be slowed by early interventions  (13). People with diabetes should  have periodic, comprehensive  eye examinations. Timely laser  photocoagulation and good  control of blood glucose can  prevent or delay the onset of  irreversible vision loss, though this  is not always accessible or available  in low- and middle-income  countries. Measurement of urine  protein will reveal early kidney  damage, and the progression to  kidney failure can be slowed by  essential drugs routinely used to  treat hypertension. Kidney failure  is treated by dialysis or a kidney  transplant. Proper footwear and  regular examination of feet for  signs of neuropathy, impaired  blood flow and skin changes can  prevent foot ulcers that often lead  to gangrene and limb amputation.  Rehabilitation services such as  physiotherapy and occupational  therapy can help minimize the  impact of complications on  people’s functioning (see Box 9). HUMAN RESOURCES A range of health professionals  is required for the care and  treatment of diabetes, including  physicians, nurses, dieticians and  specialists such as obstetricians,  ophthalmologist s,  vascular  surgeons and physiotherapists.

## Page 54

54 Managing diabetes But in many settings, access  to even the most basic health  professionals with appropriate  training in diabetes management  is not available. While more  and  better-trained  health  professionals could rectify this  problem, in many situations it is  not a realistic solution. However  there are examples of innovative  solutions, including up-skilling  available health professionals to  deliver diabetes care (see Box 10)  and training lay people to deliver  protocol-driven care. WHO PEN  includes management protocols  for non-medically qualified healthcare workers. 3.3 INTEGRATED MANAGEMENT  OF DIABETES AND OTHER  CHRONIC HEALTH CONDITIONS Diabetes management should be  integrated with management of  other NCDs, and in some settings  tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS, to  improve equity, efficiency and  outcomes. Diabetes is frequently  comorbid with a range of other  diseases and conditions, the  BOX 9.  REHABILITATION FOLLOWING DIABETES-RELATED AMPUTATION, TAJIKISTAN The physical complications associated with diabetes, including poor vascularization, can cause lowerlimb wounds that may lead to amputation. Without proper care and support this can profoundly limit  a person’s ability to work, play a full family role and enjoy recreational activities. Furthermore, people  with diabetic wounds require close attention to prevent infection and deterioration that can lead to  death. Rehabilitation services play a fundamental role across the continuum of care for people with  diabetes, helping prevent complications and providing interventions to keep people mobile and active. Approximately half of the 5000 people with diabetes that report to Tajikistan’s Republican  Endocrinology Hospital every year require rehabilitation services. The International Committee of  the Red Cross/Special Fund for the Disabled provides technical support to Tajikistan’s only physical  rehabilitation centre, which provides multidisciplinary care to people with diabetes and associated  complications. The team of physiotherapists, prosthetists and social workers, provide holistic interventions that  help people work and participate in society. Key aspects of their interventions include: yy assessment and provision of assistive devices; yy physical rehabilitation, including strengthening, endurance and gait training for those with lowerlimb amputations; yy facilitating return to work; yy providing education on self-management to prevent deterioration. While the rehabilitation service has seen encouraging outcomes (increasing functional independence,  participation in society and continuation of livelihood) in the lives of people with diabetes, knowledge  of rehabilitation services among the public and all levels of the health-care system remains poor.  Work is being done to increase the awareness of rehabilitation services and the important role they  play in diabetic care.

## Page 55

55 Managing diabetes BOX 10.  BUILDING CAPACITY FOR DIABETES MANAGEMENT, THAILAND The increasing burden of diabetes and the demand for better care have made capacity-building  essential for Thailand’s recently introduced diabetes management system and practice guidelines.  The system includes diabetes risk assessment and screening; assessment of chronic complications  and their risks; and clinical care schemes in primary, secondary and tertiary care settings with a  referral system and designated outcome indicators. There are regular training courses for building capacity. Basic training courses (3 to 5 days) are  implemented by the Diabetes Association of Thailand and the Thai Society of Diabetes Educators  for diabetes care teams, including nurses, dietitians, pharmacists and physiotherapists. Over the  past 10 years this course has trained more than 6000 health-care providers. A 4-month training  course for nurses responsible for managing diabetes has been established by the Thailand Nursing  and Midwifery Council and Faculty of nursing, Mahidol University. Currently, there are more than  1000 disease-manager nurses. In addition, a 5-day camp for practicing physicians treating type 1  diabetes is run by the Diabetes Association of Thailand and the Endocrine Society of Thailand,  alongside annual scientific meetings. Thailand’s Ministry of Public Health has developed the “simple diabetes care” concept for village  and district public health volunteers to enable them to visit patients at home and encourage their  adherence to medical advice, treatment and regular follow-up appointments. This has lowered the  rate of undiagnosed cases from 53% to 31%; increased the number of patients attending health-care  facilities; and increased the annual rate of vascular risk assessments and detection of early stage of  chronic diabetic complications. A specific training course for foot and wound care has resulted in a  declining rate of foot ulcers and amputations. Capacity-building of care teams in providing standard  care for diabetes in children and adolescents is now underway. interactions of which have an  impact on its management. In  addition to cardiovascular diseases,  ageing-related conditions such as  cognitive decline and physical  disability have emerged as frequent  comorbid conditions with diabetes.  Depression is two to three times  more common in people with  diabetes than in those without, for  example (24). The epidemiological transition  occurring in many low- and middleincome countries is characterized  by the coexistence of established  infectious disease alongside  emerging NCD epidemics (25).  Some of these diseases interact,  mediated by shared risk factors  (25), and their management may  be complicated by drug-disease  and drug-drug interactions. The  increasing longevity of people  with HIV/AIDS, for example, is  accompanied by a rising incidence  and prevalence of insulin resistance  and type 2 diabetes among them,  some of which may be related to  antiretroviral treatment (25, 26). DIABETES AND OTHER NCDS Diabetes has close links with  other NCDs and their risk factors.  Recommended management of  high cardiovascular disease risk, for

## Page 56

56 Managing diabetes example, includes blood glucose  control and counselling (for  healthy diet and physical activity),  and, similarly, management of  diabetes includes anti-hypertensive  medications at lower levels of blood  pressure than for non-diabetics  (13). An organized and integrated  health system is necessary to  deliver optimal diabetes care.  Relatively simple measures can be  implemented, including standard  protocols and clear referral  pathways between different  health-care providers and different  levels of care. A core set of such interventions is  defined in the WHO PEN package,  which includes interventions for  detection, prevention, treatment  and care of diabetes, cardiovascular  disease, chronic respiratory disease  and cancer through a primary  health-care approach (13). They are  evidence-based, cost-effective and  feasible for implementation – even  in low-resource settings. WHO  PEN equips both physicians and  non-physician health workers in  primary care. WHO PEN specifies the minimum  essential resources needed  to implement its protocols:  cardiovascular risk prediction  charts, essential medicines and  basic technologies, and costing  tools for decision-makers. WHO  PEN also guides policy-makers  in the assessment of health  system gaps and the process  of the patient visit, including  prescribing medication, the  content of counselling and the  frequency of follow-ups. Explicit  criteria for referral to higher  levels of care are provided. A  simplified medical record stores  key information in an organized  way and serves as a reminder to  follow-up actions that should be  taken at each visit. If  effectively  implemented,  WHO PEN can strengthen health  systems, improve the quality of  NCD (including diabetes) care, and  support the attainment of global  NCD targets (see Box 1, page 16)  WHO PEN implementation may  facilitate post-disaster health  system recovery and provide  continuity of care for people with  NCDs. The swift implementation  of WHO PEN in the Philippines  following Typhoon Haiyan in 2013  resulted in increased availability of  trained health service providers;  improved availability of essential  equipment, supplies and medicines;  functional referral systems; and  the use of monitoring tools, within  3 months (27). DIABETES AND TUBERCULOSIS Diabetes is a known risk factor for  tuberculosis (28) and is associated  with poorer tuberculosis outcomes,  while tuberculosis is associated  with worsening glycaemic control  (29). Since a number of countries  have both a high and increasing  diabetes prevalence and a  substantial burden of tuberculosis,  this interaction has significant  implications for management of  both diseases. Active bi-directional screening has  been reported to be associated  with the detection of more  tuberculosis and diabetes (30)  and there have been reports  of the successful piloting and  implementation of bi-directional  screening policies. For example, in  India, a pilot study demonstrated  the feasibility of screening  tuberculosis patients for type 2

## Page 57

57 Managing diabetes diabetes (31), and the National  Tuberculosis Programme was  subsequently revised to implement  this intervention across India. WHO’s Collaborative Framework  for Care and Control of Tuberculosis  and Diabetes provides guidelines  to establish mechanisms of  collaboration, including joint  coordination,  bi-directional  surveillance and screening of  tuberculosis and type 2 diabetes,  and guidelines for detection  and management of diabetes  in tuberculosis patients (and  vice versa) (32). REORIENTING HEALTH SYSTEMS Many health-care systems have  evolved to respond to acute, infectious  disease and are not organized to  manage the demographic and  epidemiogic transition towards  noncommunicable diseases. The  presence of lifelong or long-term  comorbidities requires not just a  rethinking of service delivery but  also a reorientation of the entire  health system in order to rise to  the challenge of joint management  of diabetes and other diseases.  Expanding  universal  health  coverage and access to integrated,  people-centred health services  would facilitate this reorientation. Universal health coverage aims to  ensure that all people have access  to health promotion, preventive,  curative and rehabilitative health  services of sufficient quality to  be effective, while also ensuring  that people do not suffer financial  hardship when paying for these  services. People should not be  forced into poverty because of  the cost of health care, like the  catastrophic personal health  expenditure required of many  people with diabetes. Inclusion  of diabetes-related services in  universal health coverage provides  patient protection. All countries can take action  to move more rapidly towards  universal health coverage. Key  factors in determining which  services are prioritized by countries  are the epidemiological context,  health systems development, levels  of socioeconomic development  and people’s expectations. There  is considerable diversity in healthcare systems around the world  and systems need to be flexible,  locally adaptable, innovative  and accessible to address the  increasing challenge of diabetes  and other diseases. M ov i n g  aw ay  f ro m  t h e  compartmentalization of health  services, or “silos,” towards  integrated health services is a  way to improve care and also to  advance universal health coverage  by increasing the efficiency and  effectiveness of service delivery.  The total cardiovascular disease  (CVD) risk approach, for example,  enables integrated management  of hypertension, diabetes and  other cardiovascular risk factors in  primary care, and targets available  resources at those most likely to  develop heart attacks, strokes  and diabetes complications  (33). Integrated health services  can deliver a continuum of  health  promotion,  disease  prevention, diagnosis, treatment,  rehabilitation and palliative care  services, through the different  levels and sites of care within the  health system over the course of  a lifetime. People should not be  forced into poverty  because of the cost  of diabetes care

## Page 58

58 Managing diabetes Orienting these services around  people’s needs, not just diseases,  and  approaching  them  as  participants of care, not just  beneficiaries, will help ensure that  people receive the right care at the  right time. WHO’s Global strategy  on people-centred and integrated  health services outlines different  pathways to empower and engage  people; to strengthen health  governance and accountability;  to reorient the model of healthcare services; to coordinate  services; and to create an enabling  environment (34). 3.4 ACCESS TO ESSENTIAL  MEDICINES AND BASIC  TECHNOLOGIES All people with type 1 diabetes,  and many with type 2, require  medication to reduce their blood  glucose levels. A discussion of  diabetes management must  therefore include a closer look at  access to essential medicines and  basic technologies. An  increasing  number  of  costly blood-glucose lowering  medications  are  becoming  available, but WHO’s Model list  of essential medicines contains  effective, established and costeffective treatments that should  form the basis of therapeutic  options. This applies not just for  low- and middle-income resource  settings but high-income settings  too, as there is the chance that  expenditure on non-essential  medicines in these countries may  contribute to catastrophic health  expenditure (35, 36). Availability  in public health-care settings can  depend on the inclusion of the  medicine on countries’ National  Essential Medicines Lists (NEML),  and whether the NEML serves as  basis for procurement, training of  staff, reimbursement systems and  prescription decisions. Governments should secure  funding for essential medicines  and technologies to diagnose and  manage diabetes. Affordability  depends mainly on the use of  generic medicines and their  use should be promoted – and  their quality assured – through  a strong national regulatory  system. Responsible use of  medicines can be promoted by  the implementation of evidencebased guidelines and treatment  protocols. Along with better  procurement and policies for  generic substitution, affordability  for patients or for the system  (if medicines are given free to  patients or if a national health  insurance system is in place) could  be improved by regulation of markups in the supply chain, and tax or  tariff exemption (see Box 11). INSULIN AND ORAL HYPOGLYCAEMIC  AGENTS People with type 1 diabetes  require insulin for survival –  without insulin, even for a short  time, these individuals may face  life-threatening consequences.  Yet an array of international  and national barriers interact to  hamper access to insulin, and  many in low- and middle-income  countries do not receive this  essential treatment (39, 40). The insulin market is dominated  by a small number of multinational  manufacturers, with a few, smaller  producers making up only 4% of  the market by volume (41). This  limited competition can potentially

## Page 59

59 Managing diabetes BOX 11.  IMPROVING ACCESS TO INSULIN AND ORAL MEDICINES FOR DIABETES, MOLDOVA Although insulin is on WHO’s Model list of essential medicines, access in resource-poor settings  can still be a problem because of international and national barriers – not just because of costs but  also because of access issues. The Republic of Moldova – where around one in eight adults (12.3% of the population) has diabetes  or reduced tolerance to glucose (37) – has tried to address these issues within its broader health  systems strengthening. Financial access to services improved with the introduction of mandatory  health insurance in 2002, which became fully operational in 2004. Health expenditure as a percentage  of state budget has increased to an appropriate and stable level. There has been an expansion of  coverage of basic health services, enabling universal access to primary health care and pre-hospital  emergency care, and additional benefits introduced to expand coverage to drugs prescribed in  outpatient settings. Positive developments in the last decade relating to pharmaceuticals that are of relevance to diabetes  include: increased funding for public reimbursement of outpatient drugs; introduction of external  reference pricing; inclusion of insulin in the list of reimbursed drugs since 2013; and introduction  of mandatory generic prescribing (38). All Moldovan citizens are now entitled to free access to  oral medicines for diabetes and insulin: there are three types of insulin and four oral medicines for  diabetes that are 100% reimbursable. Previously, insulin shortages had been reported by both patient representatives and doctors which  were thought to be the result of distribution problems, ineffective systems for monitoring stock  levels, and the high number of tests required by the quality control system that caused delays  in supply. There has been a change in the procurement of insulin since 2013, with a move from a  national tender programme to decentralized procurement by pharmacies. In principle, such a move  was expected to lead to several positive changes: a more reliable supply; increased choice of insulin  types; greater availability across the country; and shorter travel times for patients. There is still some way to go but the general view of clinicians and patients is that great progress  has been made. The Republic of Moldova has also recognised that access to medicines needs to  be addressed in parallel to creating a health system able to manage all aspects of diabetes care. increase insulin prices. Additional  factors in the insulin market that  may impact price include different  insulin formulations coming offpatent, as well as the considerable  increase in use of analogue insulin.  Both of these factors affect the  price of insulin before it ever  arrives in a given country. Figure 6  shows that low-income countries  generally pay most for insulin while  high and middle-income countries  pay least (42). Governments’ decisions about  insulin purchasing– tendering  practices, choice of supplier, choice  of products and delivery devices  – can have a huge impact on  budgets and on costs to end users.  Governments may recoup high costs  by charging mark-ups to patients. In  Mozambique, for example, insulin  purchased from local wholesalers  was 25% to 125% more expensive  than that purchased through  international tenders (43). In

## Page 60

60 Managing diabetes Kyrgyzstan, purchasing insulin  in cartridges (analogue insulin),  cost the ministry of health 2.5 to  8.5 times the costs that would have  accrued if the purchase had aligned  with WHO’s Model list of essential  medicines (44). Mark-ups throughout the system,  ranging from import tariffs, value  added taxes, pharmacy costs  and storage and transportation  costs further increase the cost  to individuals. An assessment of  insulin affordability found that  1 month of insulin treatment would  cost the lowest-paid government  worker the equivalent of 2.8 days of  work in Brazil, 4.7 days in Pakistan,  6.1 days in Sri Lanka, 7.3 days in  Nepal, and 19.6 days in Malawi  (45). Distribution factors also affect  availability. For example, insulin  supplies may remain in the capital  city or major urban areas when  proper cold chain management  makes transfer of supplies to other  parts of the country too expensive  or cumbersome. Other essential medicines for  diabetes control – to improve  blood glucose levels, blood  pressure and lipid control –  are frequently unavailable or  intermittent, despite existence in  generic form. In a study conducted  in 40 low- and middle-income  countries, glibenclamide and  metformin were available in only  65% of private and 49.5% of public  health-care facilities, and countries  paid a median of 2.2 times more  than the drug’s international  reference price (46). FIGURE 6.  MEDIAN ANNUAL PRICES FOR A 10 ML VIAL OF 100 IU INSULIN DURING 2003‒2014, BY COUNTRY INCOME GROUP Source: International Drug Price Indicator Guide (see Annex B for methods). High-income Upper middle-income Low-income Lower middle-income 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 Overall 2003–2014 Median price (US$) $12 $14 $16 $18 $20 $10 $8 $6 $4 $2 $0

## Page 61

61 Managing diabetes INJECTION DEVICES Insulin must be injected, meaning  syringes are also a survival need  for people using insulin. Value  added taxes are frequently  applied to syringes, which are  not readily available in the public  sector. If syringes are purchased  by the public sector, quantities  are often insufficient and not  linked to insulin purchases (6).  Pen injection devices and insulin  cartridges have some advantages  over traditional syringes (being  more practical when multiple daily  injections of insulin are required)  but their cost prohibits their use  for many patients. 3.5 SUMMARY A  cluster  of  cost-effective  interventions lies at the heart of  improving diabetes outcomes:  blood glucose control through a  combination of diet, physical activity  and, if necessary, medication;  control of blood pressure and lipids  to reduce cardiovascular risk and  other complications; and regular  screening and early intervention  for damage to the eyes, kidneys  and feet. This set of interventions  appears simple but carrying them  out depends on appropriate  structures for health-care delivery  such as access to essential  medicines and technologies,  protocols for management in  primary care, appropriate training  of health-care providers, referral  systems involving specialists,  and the active participation and  motivation of the patient. Currently, primary health-care  services in many countries do not  have the capacity to diagnose  and manage diabetes (see Part 4).  Building this capacity is a priority  to achieve better outcomes for  people with diabetes, and to meet  global targets to halt the rise in  obesity and diabetes and reduce  premature mortality from NCDs.  Diabetes management can be  strengthened even in low-resource  settings through implementation  of the standards and protocols  such as the WHO PEN package.  Efforts to improve capacity  for diagnosis and treatment of  diabetes should be undertaken  in the context of integrated NCD  management. At a minimum,  diabetes and cardiovascular disease  management can be integrated.  Integrated  management  of  diabetes and TB and/or HIV/AIDS  can be considered where there is  high prevalence of these diseases. Improving access to essential  medicines is a vital aspect  of achieving universal health  coverage and of improving health  systems’ capacity to prevent and  manage diabetes and other NCDs  (47). Diabetes has been described  as a tracer condition for assessing  health system performance (48,  49) for many reasons: it is welldefined, fairly easy to diagnose,  and common; and because optimal  management of diabetes requires  the coordinated involvement of a  variety of health-care providers  at multiple levels of the healthcare system, ongoing monitoring,  access to essential medicines  and technologies, and active  patient participation. Solutions for  improving diabetes management  could therefore provide lessons for  management of other NCDs. The costs of diabetes management  are high but they are likely to be  dwarfed by the economic costs of  poor or non-existent care in the  Diabetes management  can be strengthened  through  implementation  of standards and  protocols, even in  low-resource settings

## Page 62

62 Managing diabetes future. National-level scaling-up of  interventions that are either costsaving or cost-effective would curb  the increase of the future economic  burden of the disease as well as  significantly improve the quality of  life for people with diabetes.

## Page 63

63 Managing diabetes REFERENCES 1.	 Venkat Narayan KM, Zhang P, Kanaya AM, Williams DE, Engelgau MM, Imperatore G, et al. Diabetes:  the pandemic and potential solutions. In: Disease control priorities in developing countries, 2 ed.  Washington DC: World Bank; 2006:591–603. 2.	 Li R, Zhang P, Barker LE, Chowdhury FM, Zhang X. Cost-effectiveness of interventions to prevent and  control diabetes mellitus: a systematic review. Diabetes Care. 2010;33:(8)1872–1894. 3.	 Williams DRR. The economics of diabetes care: a global perspective. In: International textbook of  diabetes mellitus , 4th ed. Chichester, UK: Wiley Blackwell; 2015. 4.	 Harding JL, Shaw JE, Peeters A, Guiver T, Davidson S, Magliano DJ. Mortality trends among people with  type 1 and type 2 diabetes in Australia: 1997–2010. Diabetes Care. 2014;37:(9)2579–2586. 5.	 Use of glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c) in the diagnosis of diabetes mellitus. Geneva: World Health  Organization; 2011. 6.	 Beran D, Yudkin JS. Looking beyond the issue of access to insulin: what is needed for proper diabetes  care in resource-poor settings. Diabetes Research and Clinical Practice. 2010;88:(3)217–221. 7.	 Herman WH, Ye W, Griffin SJ, Simmons RK, Davies MJ, Khunti K et al. Early detection and treatment of  type 2 diabetes reduce cardiovascular morbidity and mortality: A simulation of the results of the AngloDanish-Dutch study of intensive treatment in people with screen-detected diabetes in primary care  (ADDITION-Europe). Diabetes Care. 2015;38:(8)1449–1455. 8.	 Basu S, Millett C, Vijan S, Hayward RA, Kinra S, Ahuja R, et al. The health system and population  health implications of large-scale diabetes screening in India: a microsimulation model of alternative  approaches. PLoS.Med. 2015;12:(5) e1001827. 9.	 Screening for Type 2 diabetes. Report of a WHO and International Diabetes Federation meeting WHO/ NMH/MNC/03.1. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2003. 10.	Free C, Phillips G, Galli L, Watson L, Felix L, Edwards P, et al. The effectiveness of mobile-health  technology-based health behaviour change or disease management interventions for health care  consumers: a systematic review. PLoS Med. 2013;10:e1001362. 11.	 Liang X, Wang Q, Yang X, Cao J, Chen J, Mo X, et al. Effect of mobile phone intervention for diabetes  on glycaemic control: a meta-analysis. Diabetes Medicine. 2011;28:455-463. 12.	Vervloet, M., Dijk, L. van, Bakker, D.H. de, Souverein, P.C., Santen-Reestman, J., Vlijmen, B. van, Aarle,  M.C.W. van, Hoek, L.S. van der, Bouvy, M.L. Short- and long-term effects of real-time medication  monitoring with short message service (SMS) reminders for missed doses on the refill adherence of  people with Type 2 diabetes: evidence from a randomised controlled trial. Diabetic Medicine: 2014,  31(7), 821-828. 13.	Implementation tools: Package of Essential Noncommunicable (PEN) Disease Interventions for Primary  Health Care in Low-Resource Settings. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2013. 14.	Fats and fatty acids in human nutrition: report of an expert consultation. FAO Food and Nutrition Paper  91. Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations; 2010. 15.	Ley SH, Hamdy O, Mohan V, Hu FB. Prevention and management of type 2 diabetes: dietary  components and nutritional strategies. Lancet. 2014;383:(9933)1999–2007. 16.	Guideline: Sugars intake for adults and children. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2015. 17.	 Taylor R. Type 2 diabetes: etiology and reversibility. Diabetes Care. 2013;36:(4)1047–1055. 18.	Maggard-Gibbons M, Maglione M, Livhits M, Ewing B, Maher AR, Hu J, et al. Bariatric surgery for  weight loss and glycemic control in non-morbidly obese adults with diabetes: a systematic review.  Journal of the American Medical Association. 2013;309:(21)2250–2261. 19.	 Hayes C, Kriska A. Role of physical activity in diabetes management and prevention. Journal of the  American Dietetic Association. 2008;108:(4 Suppl 1)S19–S23.

## Page 64

64 Managing diabetes 20.	The effect of intensive treatment of diabetes on the development and progression of long-term  complications in insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. The Diabetes Control and Complications Trial  Research Group. New England Journal of Medicine. 1993;329:(14)977–986. 21.	Intensive blood-glucose control with sulphonylureas or insulin compared with conventional treatment  and risk of complications in patients with type 2 diabetes (UKPDS 33). UK Prospective Diabetes Study  (UKPDS) Group. Lancet. 1998;352:(9131)837–853. 22.	WHO Model list of Essential Medicines. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2015. 23.	Worth R, Home PD, Johnston DG, Anderson J, Ashworth L, Burrin JM, et al. Intensive attention  improves glycaemic control in insulin-dependent diabetes without further advantage from home blood  glucose monitoring: results of a controlled trial. British Medical Journal (Clinical Research Edition).  1982;285:(6350)1233–1240. 24.	Roy T, Lloyd CE. Epidemiology of depression and diabetes: a systematic review. Journal of Affective  Disorders. 2012;142:Suppl, S8-21. 25.	Oni T, Youngblood E, Boulle A, McGrath N, Wilkinson RJ, Levit NS. Patterns of HIV, TB, and noncommunicable disease multi-morbidity in peri-urban South Africa – a cross sectional study. BMC  Infectious Diseases. 2015;15:20. doi:10.1186/s12879-015-0750-1. 26.	Reid MJA, Tsima BM, Kirk B. HIV and diabetes in Africa. African Journal of Diabetes Medicine.  2012;20(2);28-32. 27.	 Martinez RE, Quintana R, Go JJ, Villones MS, Marquez MA. Use of the WHO Package of Essential  Noncommunicable Disease Interventions after Typhoon Haiyan. Western Pacific Surveillance Response  Journal. 2015;6:Suppl 1, 18–20. 28.	Jeon CY, Murray MB. Diabetes mellitus increases the risk of active tuberculosis: a systematic review of  13 observational studies. PLoS Medicine. 2008;5:(7)e152. 29.	Riza AL, Pearson F, Ugarte-Gil C, Alisjahbana B, van de Vijver S, Panduru NM, et al. Clinical management  of concurrent diabetes and tuberculosis and the implications for patient services. Lancet Diabetes  Endocrinology. 2014;2:(9)740–753. 30.	Jeon CY, Harries AD, Baker MA, Hart JE, Kapur A, Lonnroth K, et al. Bi-directional screening for  tuberculosis and diabetes: a systematic review. Tropical Medicine and International Health. 2010;15:  (11)1300–1314. 31.	 Screening of patients with tuberculosis for diabetes mellitus in India. Tropical Medicine and International  Health. 18;(5):636–645. 32.	Collaborative framework for care and control of tuberculosis and diabetes. Geneva: World Health  Organization; 2011. 33.	Global status report on noncommunicable diseases. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2014. 34.	WHO global strategy on people-centred and integrated health services. Interim report. Geneva: World  Health Organization; 2015. 35.	Luo J, Avorn J, Kesselheim AS. Trends in Medicaid reimbursements for insulin from 1991 through 2014.  Journal of the American Medical Association Internal Medicine. 2015;175:(10)1681–1686. 36.	Tylee T, Hirsch IB. Costs associated with using different insulin preparations. Journal of the American  Medical Association. 2015;314:(7)665–666. 37.	 Republic of Moldova STEPS survey 2013: Fact sheet. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2014. 38.	 WHO Regional Office for Europe, Better noncommunicable disease outcomes: challenges and  opportunities for health systems. Republic of Moldova country assessment. Copenhagen: World Health  Organization; 2014. 39.	 Beran D. Improving access to insulin: what can be done? Diabetes Management. 2011;1:67–76. 40.	Beran D, Perrin C, Billo N, Yudkin JS. Improving global access to medicines for non-communicable  diseases. Lancet Global Health. 2014;2:(10)e561-e562.

## Page 65

65 Managing diabetes 41.	 Schultz K. The global diabetes care market. Novo Nordisk. 2011. Novo Nordisk. 42.	International Drug Price Indicator Guide. Management Sciences for Health. Washington DC;  Management Sciences for Health; 2015. 43.	Beran D, Yudkin, JS, de Courten M. Access to care for patients with insulin-requiring diabetes in  developing countries: case studies of Mozambique and Zambia. Diabetes Care. 2005;28:(9)2136–2140. 44.	Beran D, Abdraimova A, Akkazieva B, McKee M, Balabanova D, Yudkin JS. Diabetes in Kyrgyzstan:  changes between 2002 and 2009. International Journal of Health Planning Management. 2013;28:(2) e121-e137. 45.	Mendis S, Fukino K, Cameron A, Laing R, Filipe A Jr, Khatib O, et al. The availability and affordability of  selected essential medicines for chronic diseases in six low- and middle-income countries. Bulletin of  the World Health Organization. 2007;85:(4)279–288. 46.	Cameron A, Ewen M, Ross-Degnan D, Ball D, Laing R. Medicine prices, availability, and affordability in  36 developing and middle-income countries: a secondary analysis. Lancet. 2009;373:(9659)240–249. 47.	 Global action plan for the prevention and control of noncommunicable diseases 2013-2020. Geneva:  World Health Organization; 2013. 48.	Beran D, Yudkin J, de Courten M. Assessing health systems for type 1 diabetes in sub-Saharan Africa:  developing a ‘Rapid Assessment Protocol for Insulin Access.’ BMC Health Services Research. 2006;6:17. 49.	 Nolte E, Bain C, McKee M. Diabetes as a tracer condition in international benchmarking of health  systems. Diabetes Care. 2006;29(5):1007–11.

## Page 66

PART 4 NATIONAL CAPACITY FOR PREVENTION  AND CONTROL OF DIABETES: A SNAPSHOT

## Page 67

67 National capacity for prevention and control of diabetes: a snapshot KEY MESSAGES The majority of countries have national diabetes policies, national policies  to address unhealthy diet and physical inactivity, and national guidelines or  standards for diabetes management. Implementation and funding of national policies and guidelines is uneven. Basic technologies for early detection, diagnosis and monitoring of diabetes in  primary care settings are generally not available in low-income and lower middleincome countries. Availability of insulin, metformin and sulphonylurea(s) is very limited in primary  care facilities in low-income countries. Less than half of countries have conducted a national, population-based survey  with measurement of blood glucose status within the past 5 years. This chapter provides a global  snapshot of national capacity  based on policies, plans and  strategies for diabetes and its  key risk factors; health system  infrastructure such as guidelines  for diabetes management in  primary health care, availability  of essential technologies for  diagnosis and management,  availability of essential medicines,  and  referral  systems  and  treatment for complications; and  surveillance. Such policies, plans  and strategies contribute to the  10  progress indicators that will  be used to report on progress  towards  implementation  of  national commitments outlined  in the 2011 United Nations  Political Declaration and the  2014 United Nations General  Assembly Outcome Document on  Noncommunicable Diseases (1). Data presented in this chapter come  from the 2015 Noncommunicable  Disease Country Capacity Survey  (NCD CCS), to which national  teams from 177 WHO Member  States, representing 97% of the  world’s population, responded.  The NCD CCS has been conducted  regularly since 2000 to assess NCD  governance and infrastructure,  policy response, surveillance and  health systems response at country  level. It is increasingly used to  monitor progress in achieving  voluntary NCD targets and for  reporting on NCD progress  indicators (2). There are limitations  to the survey –for example its  use of key informants rather  than independently verified data  collection – but on the whole it  presents a clear picture of capacity  and identifies areas that need more  attention. Details of the survey  methodology can be found in  Annex B. Specific variables related

## Page 68

68 National capacity for prevention and control of diabetes: a snapshot to the prevention and management  of diabetes are presented in  this chapter. Individual profiles  summarizing this data country by  country are available online at www. who.int/diabetes/global-report. 4.1 NATIONAL POLICIES AND  PLANS FOR DIABETES Diabetes should be included in all  national NCD policies to facilitate  a coordinated, multisectoral  response. Some countries might  have a standalone policy or  plan, some might include it in  an integrated NCD policy, while  others might do both. Eighty-eight per cent of countries  (156 countries) report having a  national diabetes policy, plan  or strategy. When funding and  implementation are considered,  however, a slightly different  picture emerges. Seventy-two per  cent of countries (127 countries)  report having a national policy,  plan, strategy or action plan on  diabetes that is operational – i.e.  one that has dedicated funding  and is being implemented. In some  regions and among some countryincome levels, the proportion of  countries whose policies, plans or  strategies are operational shrinks  (see Figure 7). Of the countries  with operational national policies  for diabetes, 44% (56 countries)  include diabetes in an integrated  NCD policy; 17% (22 countries) have  a standalone policy for diabetes;  and 39% (49 countries) do both. FIGURE 7.  PROPORTION OF COUNTRIES REPORTING OPERATIONAL AND NON-OPERATIONAL NATIONAL DIABETES POLICIES, BY  WHO REGION AND COUNTRY INCOME GROUP OPERATIONAL NON-OPERATIONAL % of countries 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% 50% 40% 30% 20% 10% 0% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% 50% 40% 30% 20% 10% 0% Low-income African Region European Region Lower middle-income Region of the Americas South-East Asia Region Western Pacific Region Eastern Mediterranean  Region Upper middle-income High-income Total

## Page 69

69 National capacity for prevention and control of diabetes: a snapshot POLICIES RELATED TO PREVENTION Key modifiable risk factors for  the prevention of type 2 diabetes  are overweight, obesity, physical  inactivity and unhealthy diet (see  Background section and Part 2).  Most countries (89%) report  having national policies addressing  both healthy diet and physical  activity, but when funding and  implementation are considered,  once again, the picture changes.  About two thirds of countries  (68%) report having operational  policies addressing both healthy  diet and physical activity, though  this proportion varies by region  and country income. Thirty-one  per cent of countries report  having operational policies to  address overweight and obesity.  High-income countries were  more likely to report having  operational policies in all of these  areas than low- or middle-income  countries, but it is worth noting  that (encouragingly) the majority  of low-income countries have  operational policies to address diet  and physical activity (see Figure 8). 4.2 NATIONAL GUIDELINES AND  PROTOCOLS National, evidence-based guidelines,  protocols and standards for the  management of diabetes are  important tools for improving  care. Overall, 71% of countries  Note: policies include those that aim to reduce unhealthy diet and/or promote healthy diet, and those that aim to reduce physical  inactivity and/or promote physical activity. FIGURE 8.  PERCENTAGE OF COUNTRIES REPORTING OPERATIONAL POLICIES FOR SELECTED RISK FACTORS, BY WHO REGION  AND COUNTRY INCOME GROUP 68% of countries  report having  operational policies to  address healthy diet  and physical activity PHYSICAL INACTIVITY OVERWEIGHT / OBESITY UNHEALTHY DIET % of countries 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% 50% 40% 30% 20% 10% 0% Low-income African Region European Region Lower middle-income Region of the Americas South-East Asia Region Western Pacific Region Eastern Mediterranean  Region Upper middle-income High-income Total 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% 50% 40% 30% 20% 10% 0%

## Page 70

70 National capacity for prevention and control of diabetes: a snapshot (126 countries) report having a  national guideline for diabetes  management that is either fully or  partially implemented. Less than  half of countries (47%) report full  implementation. Middle- and highincome countries were more likely  to report implementing guidelines  for managing diabetes, with more  than 70% reporting full or partial  implementation (see Figure 9).  Less than half (46%) of lowincome countries reported fully or  partially implementing diabetes  management guidelines. Diabetes management happens  at different levels of the healthcare delivery system. A referral  system based on standard criteria  contributes to continuity of care  and ensures the optimal use of  health-care services at different  levels. Standard criteria for  referral of patients from primary  care to secondary or tertiary care  were reported as available in  71% of countries (126 countries),  but full implementation of such  criteria was reported in only 42%  of countries (74 countries). Full  implementation of referral criteria  is reported as achieved more  often in upper middle-income  and high-income countries, but  even in these categories full  implementation is not common  (54% and 46% respectively). 126 countries  report having  a national guideline for  diabetes management  that is partially  or fully implemented FIGURE 9.  PERCENTAGE OF COUNTRIES REPORTING FULLY OR PARTIALLY IMPLEMENTED DIABETES GUIDELINES, BY WHO  REGION AND COUNTRY INCOME GROUP FULLY IMPLEMENTED PARTIALLY IMPLEMENTED % of countries 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% 50% 40% 30% 20% 10% 0% Low-income African Region European Region Lower middle-income Region of the Americas South-East Asia Region Western Pacific Region Eastern Mediterranean  Region Upper middle-income High-income Total 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% 50% 40% 30% 20% 10% 0%

## Page 71

71 National capacity for prevention and control of diabetes: a snapshot 4.3 AVAILABILITY OF ESSENTIAL  MEDICINES AND TECHNOLOGIES The availability of essential  medicines and basic technologies  for early detection, diagnosis  and monitoring of diabetes in  primary health-care facilities is a  critical component of management  capacity. The NCD CCS asks  the national team to rate the  availability of essential medicines  and basic technologies in primary  care facilities. Items in question  are rated “generally available”  if they are available in 50% or  more of primary care facilities in  the country (or pharmacies, for  medicines), otherwise they are  rated “generally not available”.  The data in this section refer  exclusively to availability within the  publicly funded health-care sector  and provide no indication of what  may be available in the private  health-care sector. ESSENTIAL MEDICINES IN PRIMARY  CARE FACILITIES The NCD CCS includes availability  of three essential medicines for  diabetes management: insulin,  metformin and sulphonylurea(s)  (see Figure 10). Insulin was reported  as generally available in 72% of  countries (128 countries), but  reported availability appears to  vary widely by region and country  income. Only 23% of low-income  countries (six countries) report  that insulin is generally available,  in contrast to 96% of high-income  Only 23% of lowincome countries  report that insulin  is generally available FIGURE 10.  PERCENTAGE OF COUNTRIES REPORTING ESSENTIAL MEDICINES ARE GENERALLY AVAILABLE IN PUBLICLY FUNDED  PHARMACIES IN PRIMARY HEALTH-CARE FACILITIES INSULIN SULFONYLUREA(S) METFORMIN % of countries 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% 50% 40% 30% 20% 10% 0% Low-income African Region European Region Lower middle-income Region of the Americas South-East Asia Region Western Pacific Region Eastern Mediterranean  Region Upper middle-income High-income Total 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% 50% 40% 30% 20% 10% 0%

## Page 72

72 National capacity for prevention and control of diabetes: a snapshot countries (54 countries). Further,  the reported general availability of  insulin in the WHO Region of the  Americas and the European Region  is more than double that of the  WHO African Region and SouthEast Asia Region. Regarding oral medications for  glucose control, in 82% of countries  (145 countries) metformin is  reported as generally available,  compared to 69% (123 countries)  reporting general availability of  sulphonylurea(s). Very few lowincome countries report availability  of both. Among high-income  countries, more than 90% report  that metformin and sulphonylurea(s)  are generally available. BASIC TECHNOLOGIES IN PRIMARY  CARE FACILITIES Essential technologies necessary  for early detection, diagnosis and  monitoring of diabetes in primary  health care include weighing  machines, measurement tapes,  glucometers, blood glucose test  strips, urine protein test strips and  urine ketone test strips (3). Overall,  85%  of  countries  (151 countries) report that blood  glucose measurement is generally  available in primary care settings,  though this is true for only 50% of  low-income countries (13 countries).  Figure 11 shows the proportion  of countries reporting general  availability of height and weight  measurement, blood glucose  FIGURE 11.  PERCENTAGE OF COUNTRIES REPORTING BASIC TECHNOLOGIES GENERALLY AVAILABLE IN PUBLICLY-FUNDED  PRIMARY HEALTH-CARE FACILITIES Blood glucose  measurement is  reported as generally  available in 50% of  low-income countries  HEIGHT AND WEIGHT MESUREMENT URINE STRIP FOR GLUCOSE   AND KETONE MESUREMENT BLOOD GLUCOSE MESUREMENT % of countries 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% 50% 40% 30% 20% 10% 0% Low-income African Region European Region Lower middle-income Region of the Americas South-East Asia Region Western Pacific Region Eastern Mediterranean  Region Upper middle-income High-income Total 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% 50% 40% 30% 20% 10% 0%

## Page 73

73 National capacity for prevention and control of diabetes: a snapshot measurement, and urine strips for  glucose and ketone measurement.  There is a strong income gradient  in reported availability of these  essential technologies. Only one  in three low-income and lower  middle-income countries report  having all three of these basic,  essential technologies generally  available, in contrast with nearly  two in three of upper-middle and  nearly all of high-income countries  (not shown). Figure 12 shows the reported  availability of other, more  expensive or sophisticated  technologies and procedures  useful for early detection,  diagnosis and management of  diabetes and its complications:  oral glucose tolerance test,  glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c)  test, foot vibration by tuning fork,  Doppler ultrasound testing of foot  vascular status, and examination  of the eye with dilated pupil  (dilated fundus examination).  It is clear that these additional  technologies are much more  readily available in high-income  countries than in low- or middleincome countries. MANAGEMENT OF KIDNEY FAILURE Diabetes is a prominent cause of  kidney disease. Kidney failure, also  called end-stage renal disease,  requires renal replacement  therapy. Overall, 60% of countries  (106 countries) reported general  availability of renal replacement  FIGURE 12.  PERCENTAGE COUNTRIES REPORTING OTHER TECHNOLOGIES AS GENERALLY AVAILABLE IN PUBLICLY-FUNDED  PRIMARY HEALTH-CARE FACILITIES  ORAL GLUCOSE TOLERANCE TEST HBA1C TEST FOOT VASCULAR STATUS BY DOPPLER DILATED-PUPIL FUNDUS EXAMINATION FOOT VIBRATION PERCEPTION BY TUNING FORK % of countries 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% 50% 40% 30% 20% 10% 0% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% 50% 40% 30% 20% 10% 0% African Region Region of the Americas Eastern Mediterranean  Region European Region South-East Asia Region Western Pacific Region Low-income Lower middle-income Upper middle-income High-income Total

## Page 74

74 National capacity for prevention and control of diabetes: a snapshot by dialysis, and 40% (71 countries)  reported general availability of  renal replacement by transplant.  Among high-income countries,  93% (52 countries) report that  renal replacement by dialysis  is generally available, while in  middle- and low-income countries  it is 46% (47 countries) and 27%  (seven countries) respectively. 4.4 SURVEILLANCE AND  MONITORING Regular  population-based  measurement of risk factors for  type 2 diabetes is a key aspect  of capacity to assess trends and  impact of interventions. Less  than 50% of countries reported  conducting a national populationbased survey with blood glucose  measurement within the past  5 years. This low proportion  partially reflects the cost and  complexity  associated  with  such measurement in surveys.  WHO’s Western Pacific Region  had the highest achievement of  surveys involving blood glucose  measurement, with 80% of  countries reporting one in the  past 5 years. Countries in the WHO  Eastern Mediterranean Region  and the WHO European Region  were least likely to have done a  survey involving blood glucose  measurement, with 25% and 27%  of countries respectively reporting  such a survey in the past 5 years. Coverage of other risk factors was  slightly better. Roughly two in  three countries had conducted a  national, population-based survey  of overweight and obesity (72%)  and physical inactivity (69%) in the  past 5 years. Only 58% of countries  conducted a national, populationbased survey of overweight and  obesity that involved measurement  of height and weight. Diabetes registries are specialized  monitoring systems that can be  a valuable resource to improve  treatment compliance, prevent  complications and assess the  clinical outcomes of management.  Globally, less than half of  countries (44%) have a diabetes  registry. Only 14% of countries  reported having a registry which  is population-based, whereas 19%  reported a hospital-based registry,  and 1% reported another kind of  registry for diabetes. Low-income  countries were least likely to have  any kind of diabetes registry (19%)  compared with middle- and highincome countries where it was 54%  and 50% respectively. 4.5 SUMMARY The results of the 2015 NCD  CCS give an encouraging global  impression that countries are  taking action to address diabetes.  Nearly three-quarters (72%) of  countries have a national diabetes  policy that is implemented with  dedicated funding, and countries  are also taking action at the policy  level to address unhealthy diets  and physical inactivity. Further  efforts are needed to ensure  funding and implementation of  these policies and plans. When it comes to setting standards  to improve diabetes management,  71% of countries have national  guidelines or standards, though  less than half of countries  are fully implementing them.  Implementation of these standards  can help to contain cost, optimize  resources and ensure equitable  service delivery, so mechanisms  Less than 50% of  countries reported  conducting a national  population-based  survey with blood  glucose measurement

## Page 75

75 National capacity for prevention and control of diabetes: a snapshot that kick-start locally appropriate  implementation  of  national  guidelines need to be explored.  These might include periodic  audits and the involvement of  professional associations and  patients’ groups. The availability of essential  medicines and basic technologies  in primary health care deserves  further exploration, particularly in  countries where basic technologies  and essential medicines are not  reported to be generally available. Greater investment in data for  surveillance and monitoring  is called for, both through  population-based surveys and  incremental  monitoring  of  diabetes (4). Finally, the NCD CCS findings  presented in this chapter speak  loudly that progress towards  diabetes  prevention  and  management is grossly uneven.  HbA1c tests, considered the  optimal tool for monitoring blood  glucose levels (see Part 3), are  mostly unavailable in low- and  middle-income countries, but in  many settings even more basic  technologies for diagnosis and  monitoring are also lacking. Among  low- and lower middle-income  countries, only one in three (35%  and 36% of countries respectively)  can report that the most basic  technologies to measure height  and weight, blood glucose, and  urine strips for glucose and  ketone measurement are generally  available in primary care facilities.  Insulin, along with metformin  and sulphonylurea(s), is generally  available in only a minority of  low-income countries. This lack  of access to basic technologies  and essential medicines stands  in sharp contrast to the reported  widespread availability of these  items in high-income countries. REFERENCES 1.	 How WHO will report in 2017 to the United Nations General Assembly on the progress achieved in the  implementation of commitments included in the 2011 UN Political Declaration and 2014 UN Outcome  Document on NCDs (Technical note). Geneva: World Health Organization; 2015. 2.	 Noncommunicable diseases progress monitor 2015. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2015. 3.	 Implementation tools: Package of Essential Noncommunicable (PEN) Disease Interventions for Primary  Health Care in Low-Resource Settings. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2013. 4.	 Global action plan for the prevention and control of noncommunicable diseases 2013–2020. Geneva:  World Health Organization; 2013. Only 1 in 3 countries  in lower income  groups report general  availability of the most  basic technologies  for diagnosis and  management

## Page 76

76 Conclusions and recommendations CONCLUSIONS AND  RECOMMENDATIONS

## Page 77

77 Conclusions and recommendations SCALING-UP PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF DIABETES WITHIN AN INTEGRATED NCD RESPONSE As the prevalence and numbers of people with diabetes continue to rise – a result of changes in the way  people eat, move and live, and an ageing global population – the already-large health and economic impacts  of diabetes will grow. These impacts can be reduced through effective actions. With sufficient lifelong management and regular  follow-up, people with all types of diabetes can live longer and healthier lives. The occurrence of type 2 diabetes  can be reduced through population-based and individual prevention measures that target key risk factors. Tackling diabetes is integral to the success of the overall response to NCDs. In most countries, commitments  made through the Sustainable Development Goals – to reduce premature NCD mortality by a third by 2030, and  to achieve universal health coverage – will require focused attention on diabetes prevention and management. The data presented in this report indicate that many countries have begun to take action, evidenced by the  high proportion of countries reporting national policies and plans related to diabetes prevention and control.  Implementation, however, lags behind. Access to essential medicines and technologies appears to be a key  obstacle to diabetes management, particularly in low- and middle-income countries. In many countries, lack  of access to affordable insulin remains a key impediment to successful treatment and results in needless  complications and premature deaths. Guidance for effective diabetes prevention and control is set out in the WHO Global action plan for the  prevention and control of NCDs 2013–2020 (WHO NCD Global Action Plan), and a roadmap of national  commitments to address diabetes is visible in the 2011 UN Political Declaration on NCDs and the 2014 UN  Outcome Document on NCDs. The WHO NCD Global Action Plan global monitoring framework includes  targets for 2025 to reduce mortality from diabetes and other NCDs, and a specific target to halt the rise in  diabetes and obesity. In the context of an overall integrated approach to NCDs, Countries can take a series  of actions, in line with the objectives of the WHO NCD Global Action Plan, to reduce the impact of diabetes: 1. ACCORD GREATER PRIORITY TO NCD PREVENTION AND CONTROL, INCLUDING DIABETES Addressing NCDs, including diabetes, is an acknowledged priority for social development and investment in  people. Scaling-up action for diabetes prevention and management with a wider NCD response requires highlevel political commitment, resources, and effective leadership and advocacy – both national and international.  Recommended actions for Member States to raise the priority of diabetes and NCDs include the following steps. yy Continue commitment to addressing diabetes as a priority in national NCD responses. yy Raise awareness about the national public health burden caused by diabetes and the relationship between  diabetes, poverty and socioeconomic development. yy Consider establishing a national, multisectoral and high-level commission, agency or task force for engagement,  policy coherence and mutual accountability among different spheres of policy-making that have a bearing on  NCDs, in order to implement whole-of-government and whole-of-society approaches. yy Increase and prioritize national budgetary allocations for addressing diabetes and key risk factors.

## Page 78

78 Conclusions and recommendations 2. STRENGTHEN NATIONAL CAPACITY TO ACCELERATE COUNTRY RESPONSE The lead responsibility for ensuring appropriate legislative, regulatory, financial and service arrangements for  diabetes prevention and management lies with government. Integrated, multisectoral action and accountability  are necessary for success. In the context of existing commitments to address NCD prevention and management,  recommended actions to strengthen national capacity to address diabetes include the following steps. yy Strengthen the capacity of ministries of health to exercise a strategic leadership and coordination role in  policy development that engages all stakeholders across government, nongovernmental organizations, civil  society and the private sector, ensuring that issues relating to diabetes receive a coordinated, comprehensive  and integrated response. yy Ensure that national policies and plans addressing diabetes are fully costed and then funded and implemented.  Make use of all available data on exposure to the known risk factors for type 2 diabetes, diabetes prevalence  and the complications of diabetes to inform provisions in the national plan for diabetes prevention and  management. yy Foster accountability by setting national targets and indicators for diabetes, obesity, physical inactivity,  availability of essential medicines and basic technologies, and reductions in premature mortality resulting from  NCDs, taking into account the global NCD targets for 2025 and the NCD-related Sustainable Development  Goal targets for 2030. yy Include interventions for the prevention and control of diabetes within existing national programmes for  nutrition, physical activity and sport, maternal and child health, cardiovascular disease, and communicable  diseases such as HIV/AIDS and tuberculosis, especially in primary care. 3. CREATE, SUSTAIN AND EXPAND HEALTH-PROMOTING ENVIRONMENTS TO REDUCE MODIFIABLE RISK FACTORS The key modifiable risk factors for type 2 diabetes are overweight and obesity, insufficient physical activity  and unhealthy dietary practices. Smoking also increases the risk of type 2 diabetes, as well as the risk of  diabetes-related complications. Reducing these factors will decrease the occurrence of type 2 diabetes and  reduce complications related to all types of diabetes. It will also lead to reductions in other NCDs such as  cardiovascular disease. Preventing people becoming overweight or obese is a priority for reducing type 2 diabetes. Many of the risks  start in the womb, and nutrition and health during the antenatal period are critical. Promotion of breastfeeding,  and healthier diet and physical activity in childhood and adolescence along with other supportive environments,  can contribute to healthier people and reduction in diabetes and NCDs. Culturally and environmentally appropriate strategies are needed to create environments that support  people to maintain healthy body weight, healthy diet, and physical activity. Recommended actions include  the following steps. y y Promote the intake of healthy foods and reduce the intake of unhealthy food and sugar-sweetened  beverages. Policy tools include fiscal measures to raise the price of sugar-sweetened beverages and  unhealthy foods and/or lower the price of healthier foods; regulation of marketing of food and nonalcoholic beverages to children; nutrition labelling; and a package of interventions to improve early  childhood nutrition, including promotion of breastfeeding.

## Page 79

79 Conclusions and recommendations yy Create supportive built and social environments for physical activity – transport and urban planning policy  measures can facilitate access to safe, affordable opportunities for physical activity. Point-of-decision prompts  can encourage more active transport – to use stairs versus a lift, for example. yy Maximize impact with multicomponent programmes involving policy changes, settings-based interventions,  mass media campaigns and education. Prioritize highly vulnerable and/or disadvantaged groups. In addition to measures to promote healthy diet and physical activity, reducing exposure to tobacco will  reduce the complications of diabetes and may lead to reductions in type 2 diabetes. Tobacco use can be  reduced through implementation of comprehensive tobacco control measures in line with WHO’s Framework  Convention on Tobacco Control. 4. STRENGTHEN AND ORIENT HEALTH SYSTEMS TO ADDRESS DIABETES Improvements in diabetes management will reduce rates of complications, ease pressure on health systems  and improve quality of life for people living with diabetes. The core components of diabetes management include diagnosis; health education and counselling to promote  healthy choices and self-care; medications in some cases; screening and treatment of complications; and  consistent follow-up. Provision of these building blocks of care in a primary health-care setting requires adequate  health infrastructure and planning. Diabetes management should be part of national NCD management and be incorporated into the package  of essential services included in universal health coverage. Recommended actions to strengthen diabetes  management include the following steps. yy Adapt and implement a primary health-care package for the diagnosis and effective management of all  types of diabetes, including management protocols and referral criteria, in the context of integrated NCD  management. yy Implement policies and programmes to ensure equitable access to affordable essential medicines (including  life-saving insulin) and technologies (including diagnostic equipment and supplies). yy Enhance the skills and capacity of health-care providers to provide comprehensive care for diabetes. yy Promote education and awareness around self-care practices and regular check-ups to facilitate early detection  and treatment of complications. 5. PROMOTE HIGH-QUALITY RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT There is evidence for effective interventions to improve management of diabetes and to reduce its modifiable  risk factors, but there are significant gaps in the knowledge base. WHO’s prioritized research agenda for  prevention and control of NCDs outlines key areas of diabetes-related research. Recommended research to  advance diabetes prevention and control includes the following areas. yy Ongoing research into risk factors and prevention of all types of diabetes. yy Innovative intervention research to expand the evidence base for promotion of physical activity.

## Page 80

80 Conclusions and recommendations yy Innovative outcome evaluation to capture the impact of environmental change on overweight and obesity,  and on type 2 diabetes. yy Implementation research to better understand the scope and scale of health-system strengthening. yy Options to improve access to insulin. 6. MONITOR TRENDS AND DETERMINANTS, AND EVALUATE PROGRESS Monitoring progress in diabetes prevention and control requires establishing and strengthening appropriate  surveillance mechanisms, as well as the capacity to make use of the resulting data. Recommended actions for  strengthening diabetes surveillance and monitoring include the following steps. yy Introduce or strengthen existing vital registration and cause of death registration systems to better reflect  the role of diabetes as the primary or underlying cause of death. y y Strengthen national capacity to collect, analyse and use representative data on the diabetes burden  and trends. yy Conduct periodic population-level surveys that include measurement of risk factors and blood glucose. Use  information from risk factor surveys and country capacity surveys, and modify plans and programmes as necessary. yy Develop, maintain and strengthen a diabetes registry if feasible and sustainable, and include information on  complications. This can be more easily achieved when electronic medical files are used. This first WHO Global report on diabetes underscores the enormous size of the problem, and also the potential  to reverse current trends. The political basis for concerted action to address diabetes is there, woven into the  Sustainable Development Goals, the United Nations Political Declaration on NCDs, and the WHO NCD Global  Action Plan 2013–2020. Where built upon, these foundations will catalyse action by all. There are no simple solutions for addressing diabetes but coordinated, multicomponent intervention can make  a significant difference. Everyone has a role to play – governments, health-care providers, people with diabetes  and those who care for them, civil society, food producers, and manufacturers and suppliers of medicines  and technology are all stakeholders. Collectively, they can all make a significant contribution to halt the rise  in diabetes and improve the lives of those living with the disease.

## Page 81

81 Conclusions and recommendations

## Page 82

82 Annexes ANNEXES

## Page 83

83 Annexes ANNEX A.  CURRENT WHO RECOMMENDATIONS FOR THE DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA FOR DIABETES AND  INTERMEDIATE HYPERGLYCAEMIA In people who do not have symptoms, a positive test for diabetes should be repeated on another day. 1  Blood glucose measurement is relatively simple and cheap and should be available at primary health-care level. 1.  Source: Definition and diagnosis of diabetes and intermediate hyperglycaemia. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2006. Diabetes Fasting plasma glucose 2-h plasma glucose* HbA1c ≥ 7.0 mmol/L (126 mg/dl) or ≥ 11.1 mmol/L (200 mg/dl) or ≥ 6.5% Impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) Fasting plasma glucose 2-h plasma glucose* < 7.0 mmol/L (126 mg/dl) and ≥ 7.8 and < 11.1 mmol/L (140 mg/dl and 200 mg/dl) Impaired fasting glucose (IFG) Fasting plasma glucose 2-h plasma glucose* 6.1 to 6.9 mmol/L (110 mg/dl to 125 mg/dl) and (if measured) < 7.8 mmol/L (140 mg/dl) Gestational diabetes (GDM) One or more of the following: Fasting plasma glucose 1-h plasma glucose** 2-h plasma glucose 5.1–6.9 mmol/L (92–125 mgl/dl) ≥ 10.0 mmol/L (180 mg/dl) 8.5–11.0 mmol/L (153–199 mg/dl) * Venous plasma glucose 2 hours after ingestion of 75 g oral glucose load ** Venous plasma glucose 1 hour after ingestion of 75 g oral glucose load

## Page 84

84 Annexes ANNEX B.  METHODS FOR ESTIMATING DIABETES PREVALENCE, OVERWEIGHT AND OBESITY PREVALENCE,  MORTALITY ATTRIBUTABLE TO HIGH BLOOD GLUCOSE, AND PRICE OF INSULIN Data in this report were derived from a number of sources, each of which is explained below. They are not  necessarily the official statistics of Member States. PREVALENCE OF DIABETES AND TRENDS IN MEAN FASTING PLASMA GLUCOSE LEVELS The diabetes prevalence data presented in this report were estimated by the NCD Risk Factor Collaboration  (NCD-RisC) – a worldwide network/consortium of public health and medical researchers and practitioners  who together work with the World Health Organization to document NCD risk factors and their health effects  around the world. Diabetes prevalence and mean fasting plasma glucose (FPG) were estimated in the adult  population (18 years and older) for the years 1980 and 2014. Diabetes was defined as fasting plasma glucose  levels >=7.0 mmol/L (126 mg/dl); or using insulin or oral hypoglycaemic drugs; or having a history of diagnosis  of diabetes (1). To estimate diabetes prevalence and mean fasting plasma glucose by country for the years 1980 and 2014,  NCD-RisC used data provided to WHO or to the NCD-RisC group (1). Inclusion criteria for analysis were that  the data had come from a random sample of a national, subnational, or community population, with clearly  described survey methods and a clearly specified definition of diabetes, and which had measured one of  the following biomarkers: FPG, 2-hour oral glucose tolerance test (2hOGTT), and/or HbA1c. Regressions  were used to convert any prevalence data that had been defined using alternative definitions of diabetes,  such as definitions using 2hOGTT and FPG, or based on an alternative FPG cut-off. Statistical models were  used to estimate prevalence and mean fasting plasma glucose by country and year (for description, see (2) in  references). Uncertainty in estimates was analysed by taking into account sampling error and uncertainty due  to statistical modelling. For comparison by regional groupings and time trends, prevalence estimates were  age-adjusted using the Standard WHO Population (3). The estimates are an update of estimates for the same year published in the Global status report on NCDs  2014 (4), as they include additional survey data. PREVALENCE OF OVERWEIGHT AND OBESITY The prevalence of overweight and obesity data presented in this report were estimated by NCD-RisC, in the  adult population (18 years and older) for 2014 (5). Overweight was defined as the percentage of the population  aged 18 or older having a body mass index (BMI) ≥25 kg/m2. Obesity was defined as the percentage of the  population aged 18 or older having a body mass index (BMI) ≥30 kg/m2. NCD-RisC used data provided to  WHO or to the NCD-RisC group. Inclusion criteria for analysis were that the data had come from a random  sample of a national, subnational, or community population, with clearly described survey methods and with  height and weight measured in the study population. Statistical models were used to estimate prevalence by  country and year (for description, see (5) in references). Uncertainty in estimates was analysed by taking into  account sampling error and uncertainty due to statistical modelling. For comparison by regional groupings  and time trends, prevalence estimates were age-adjusted using the Standard WHO Population (3).

## Page 85

85 Annexes MORTALITY ATTRIBUTABLE TO DIABETES AND HIGH BLOOD GLUCOSE Age and sex-specific, all-cause mortality rates were estimated for 2000–2012 from revised life tables published  in World Health Statistics 2014 (6). Detailed information on the methodology is available in WHO methods  and data sources for country-level causes of death 2000–2012 (7). The total number of deaths by age and sex  was estimated for each country by applying these death rates to the estimated population prepared by the  United Nations Population Division in its 2012 revision (8). Causes of death were estimated for 2000–2012  using data sources and methods described by WHO in 2014 (9). Vital registration systems that record deaths  with sufficient completeness were used as the preferred data source. The mortality estimates are based on a  combination of country life tables, cause of death models and regional cause of death patterns. There is convincing evidence for a causal relationship between higher-than-optimal fasting blood glucose  levels and cardiovascular disease (CVD), chronic kidney disease, and tuberculosis (TB) mortality. The optimal  distribution of fasting blood glucose is estimated to be population distribution with a mean of 4.9–5.3 mmol/L,  SD 0.4–0.6, which are levels corresponding to lowest all-cause mortality as derived from meta-analyses of  prospective studies (10). Relative risks of higher-than-optimal fasting plasma glucose were derived from  meta-analyses of prospective studies (10, 11). Population-attributable fractions for each age-sex group and  each country were calculated using the estimated distribution of FPG and relative risks for each cause of  death (CVD, chronic kidney disease, and TB). The number of deaths attributable to high blood glucose was  calculated by multiplying the population-attributable fraction for CVD deaths, chronic kidney disease deaths  and TB deaths by the number of deaths from each cause for each age-sex-country unit. All deaths with  diabetes assigned as the underlying cause of death are assumed to be caused by higher-than-optimal blood  glucose. More details on the methodology are available elsewhere (12). ASSESSING NATIONAL RESPONSE TO DIABETES PREVENTION AND CONTROL Assessment of national capacity indicators related to diabetes prevention management was based on Member  State responses to the 2015 Noncommunicable Disease Country Capacity Survey (NCD CCS) (13). The NCD CCS is conducted periodically by WHO to assess individual country capacity for NCD prevention.  A first survey was conducted in 2000, followed by surveys in 2005, 2010, 2013 and 2015. The questionnaire  covers health system infrastructure; funding; policies, plans and strategies; surveillance; primary health  care; and partnerships and multilateral collaboration. The 2015 NCD CCS was completed by national NCD  focal points or designated colleagues within the ministry of health or a national institute/agency. The  questions were designed to obtain objective information about the adequacy of capacity, and countries  were requested to provide supporting documentation to enable review by WHO in order to validate the  responses. Where discrepancies were noted between the country response and the provided supporting  documents or other available sources of information at WHO, clarification was requested from the  countries. The 2015 NCD CCS was completed through a web-based platform between May and August  2015. Of 194 Member States, 177 responded to the survey, representing 97% of the world’s population.  More information on the NCD CCS, including the questionnaire and past survey reports, is available on the  survey website (http://www.who.int/chp/ncd_capacity/en/). PRICE OF INSULIN Management Sciences for Health (MSH) is a non-profit organisation established in 1971 (14). Since its  establishment it has worked in over 150 countries to develop health systems, focusing on improving quality,  availability and affordability of health services. One of the tools developed by MSH is the International Drug  Price Indicator Guide (IDPIG) (15). The guide provides a variety of prices from different sources including

## Page 86

86 Annexes REFERENCES 1.	 NCD Risk Factor Collaboration (NCD-RisC). Worldwide trends in diabetes since 1980: a pooled analysis  of 751 population-based studies with 4*4 million participants. Lancet 2016; published online April 7.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(16)00618-8. 2.	 Finucane MM, Danaei G, Ezzati M. Bayesian estimation of population-level trends in measures of health  status. Statistical Sciences. 2014;29;18–25. 3.	 Ahmad O. Age standardization of rates: a new WHO standard (Technical report). GPE discussion paper  series: No 31. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2001. 4.	 Global status report on noncommunicable diseases 2014. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2014. 5.	 NCD Risk Factor Collaboration (NCD-RisC). Trends in adult body-mass index in 200 countries from 1975  to 2014: a pooled analysis of 1698 population-based measurement studies with 19*2 million participants.  Lancet (in press). 6.	 World Health Statistics 2014. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2014. 7.	 WHO methods for life expectancy and healthy life expectancy. Global health estimates technical paper  WHO/HIS/HSI/GHE/2014.5. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2014. 8.	 United Nations Population Division. World population prospects – 2012 revision. New York: United  Nations; 2013. 9.	 WHO methods and data sources for country-level causes of death 2000–2012. Global health estimates  technical paper WHO/HIS/HSI/GHE/2014.7.  Geneva: World Health Organization; 2014. 10.	Singh GM, Danaei G, Farzadfar F, Stevens GA, Woodward M, Wormser DK, et al. The age-specific  quantitative effects of metabolic risk factors on cardiovascular diseases and diabetes: a pooled analysis.  PLoS. One. 2013;8,:(7)e65174.  11.	 Jeon CY, Murray MB. Diabetes mellitus increases the risk of active tuberculosis: a systematic review of  13 observational studies. PLoS.Med. 2008;5:(7)e152.  12.	Global Burden of Metabolic Risk Factors for Chronic Diseases Collaboration. Cardiovascular disease,  chronic kidney disease and diabetes mortality burden of cardiometabolic risk factors from 1980 to 2010:  a comparative risk assessment. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinology. 2014;2:(8)634–647.  13.	Noncommunicable diseases progress monitor, 2015. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2015.  14.	Mission and Vision. Medford, Massachusettes: Management Sciences for Health; 2015.  15.	International Drug Price Indicator Guide, 2015. Washington DC: Management Sciences for Health; 2015. 16.	Measuring medicine prices, availability, affordability and price components Geneva and Amsterdam:  World Health Organization and Health Action International; 2008. pharmaceutical suppliers, international development agencies and governments. This guide allows for  comparison of prices of medicines of assured quality and is used as a reference in many approaches looking at  access to medicines, for example the methodology developed by WHO and Health Action International (16).  Using the online version of IDPIG, data from 1996 to 2014 were extracted from purchasers of insulin. All insulin  formulations were standardized to an equivalent of a 10 ml 100 IU vial. The minimum, maximum and median  prices are calculated over the time period for all countries combined, as well as median prices over the time  period, disaggregated by country income group as defined by the World Bank in 2015.

## Page 87

PHOTO CREDITS Page 10	 WHO / Quinn Mattingly Page 17	 WHO / Atul Loke Page 20	 WHO / Eduardo Martino Page 31	 WHO / Patrick Brown Page 34	 WHO / Atul Loke Page 46	 WHO / Fredrik Naumann Page 62	 WHO / Patrick Brown Page 66	 WHO / Eduardo Martino Page 76	 WHO / Patrick Brown Page 82	 WHO / Fredrik Naumann

## Page 88

ISBN 978 92 4 156525 7

